                                          117th CONGRESS                                                                                        Printed for the use of the
                                          2d Session                                                                    Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe




                                                                    No Safe Haven:
                                                             Launching the U.S.-Europe
                                                            Coalition on Russia Sanctions




                                                                                                    DECEMBER 13, 2022



                                                                                       Briefing of the
                                                                      Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe

                                                                                                          Washington: 2023
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                                                                             CSCESeal.EPS




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00001   Fmt 3191   Sfmt 3191   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                                                      Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
                                                                               234 Ford House Office Building
                                                                                    Washington, DC 20515
                                                                                        202–225–1901
                                                                                    csce@mail.house.gov
                                                                                     http://www.csce.gov
                                                                                       @HelsinkiComm




                                                                                       Legislative Branch Commissioners

                                                     SENATE                                                                            HOUSE
                                         BENJAMIN L. CARDIN. MARYLAND                                                       STEVE COHEN, TENNESSEE Co-Chairman
                                           Chairman                                                                         ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, ALABAMA
                                         RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, CONNECTICUT                                                    EMANUEL CLEAVER II, MISSOURI
                                         JOHN BOOZMAN, ARKANSAS                                                             BRIAN FITZPATRICK, PENNSYLVANIA
                                         TIM SCOTT, SOUTH CAROLINA                                                          RUBEN GALLEGO, ARIZONA
                                         JEANNE SHAHEEN, NEW HAMPSHIRE                                                      RICHARD HUDSON, NORTH CAROLINA
                                         TINA SMITH, MINNESOTA                                                              GWEN MOORE, WISCONSIN
                                         THOM TILLIS, NORTH CAROLINA                                                        MARC VEASEY, TEXAS
                                         SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, RHODE ISLAND                                                   JOE WILSON, SOUTH CAROLINA
                                         ROGER F. WICKER, MISSISSIPPI

                                                                                        Executive Branch Commissioners

                                                                                      DEPARTMENT OF STATE, to be appointed
                                                                                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, to be appointed
                                                                                    DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, to be appointed




                                                                                                                     [II]
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                      (2)




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00002   Fmt 3193      Sfmt 3193   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                             ABOUT THE ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE

                                              The Helsinki process, formally titled the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
                                         Europe, traces its origin to the signing of the Helsinki Final Act in Finland on August
                                         1, 1975, by the leaders of 33 European countries, the United States and Canada. As of
                                         January 1, 1995, the Helsinki process was renamed the Organization for Security and
                                         Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
                                              The membership of the OSCE has expanded to 57 participating States, reflecting the
                                         breakup of the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.
                                              The OSCE Secretariat is in Vienna, Austria, where weekly meetings of the partici-
                                         pating States’ permanent representatives are held. In addition, specialized seminars and
                                         meetings are convened in various locations. Periodic consultations are held among Senior
                                         Officials, Ministers and Heads of State or Government.
                                              Although the OSCE continues to engage in standard setting in the fields of military
                                         security, economic and environmental cooperation, and human rights and humanitarian
                                         concerns, the Organization is primarily focused on initiatives designed to prevent, manage
                                         and resolve conflict within and among the participating States. The Organization deploys
                                         numerous missions and field activities located in Southeastern and Eastern Europe, the
                                         Caucasus, and Central Asia. The website of the OSCE is: <www.osce.org>.

                                                 ABOUT THE COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE

                                              The Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, also known as the Helsinki
                                         Commission, is an independent U.S. Government commission created in 1976 to monitor
                                         and encourage compliance by the participating States with their OSCE commitments,
                                         with a particular emphasis on human rights.
                                              The Commission consists of nine members from the United States Senate, nine mem-
                                         bers from the House of Representatives, and one member each from the Departments of
                                         State, Defense and Commerce. The positions of Chair and Co-Chair rotate between the
                                         Senate and House every two years, when a new Congress convenes. A professional staff
                                         assists the Commissioners in their work.
                                              In fulfilling its mandate, the Commission gathers and disseminates relevant informa-
                                         tion to the U.S. Congress and the public by convening hearings, issuing reports that
                                         reflect the views of Members of the Commission and/or its staff, and providing details
                                         about the activities of the Helsinki process and developments in OSCE participating
                                         States.
                                              The Commission also contributes to the formulation and execution of U.S. policy
                                         regarding the OSCE, including through Member and staff participation on U.S. Delega-
                                         tions to OSCE meetings. Members of the Commission have regular contact with
                                         parliamentarians, government officials, representatives of non-governmental organiza-
                                         tions, and private individuals from participating States. The website of the Commission
                                         is: <www.csce.gov>.

                                                                                                                 [III]
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00003   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                                                      No Safe Haven:
                                                  Launching the U.S.-Europe Coalition on Russia Sanctions

                                                                                                    DECEMBER 13, 2022




                                                                                                                                                                                        Page

                                                                                                    COMMISSIONERS


                                         Representative Steve Cohen, from Tennessee, Co-Chairman .....................................................                                    2


                                                                                                          WITNESSES


                                         Oleksii Goncharenko, Member of Parliament, Chairman of the Ukrainian Parliament Cau-
                                           cuses ‘‘For Free Caucasus’’ and ‘‘For Democratic Belarus,’’ Ukraine ......................................                                     4
                                         Bob Seely, Member of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom .....................................                                            5
                                         Arkadius Mularczyk, Member of the Sejm, Leader of the Polish Delegation to the Council
                                           of Europe, Poland ........................................................................................................................     6



                                                                                                      PARTICIPANTS


                                         Paul Massaro, Senior Policy Advisor, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe ...                                                        1




                                                                                                                  [IV]
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     (4)




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00004   Fmt 3193     Sfmt 3193   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                                                                                  No Safe Haven:
                                                 Launching the U.S.-Europe Coalition on Russia Sanctions



                                                                                                  December 13, 2022



                                                               Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
                                                                                                    Washington, DC


                                              The Briefing Was Held From 8:37 a.m. To 9:01 a.m. via videoconference, Paul
                                         Massaro, Senior Policy Advisor, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, pre-
                                         siding.
                                              Committee Members Present: Representative Steve Cohen [D-TN], Co-Chairman;
                                         Representative Joe Wilson [R-SC], Ranking Member.
                                              Committee Staff Present: Paul Massaro, Senior Policy Advisor, Commission on Secu-
                                         rity and Cooperation in Europe.


                                              Mr. MASSARO: Welcome to this launch of the U.S.-Europe Sanctions Coalition. This
                                         is an effort, an interparliamentary effort to buildup more sanctions and fill in the loop-
                                         holes of those Russian oligarchs and other proxies who have not been sanctioned in the
                                         really, actually quite powerful G–7 effort to hold Russia accountable for its full-scale inva-
                                         sion, its genocide in Ukraine. Sanctions have been an absolutely critical part of this effort.
                                         Of course, we have to get weapons to Ukraine. That is, No. 1. We have to ensure that
                                         support goes to Ukraine. We also need sanctions, that is to say, we need to starve the
                                         Russian economy, we need to reduce Russia’s capacity to kill, to commit this genocide.
                                              Though we started out very strong after February 24th, after the initial invasion, we
                                         have really seemed to have tapered off. At the—initially, in the first few weeks, we saw
                                         an almost unprecedented effort—particularly from the EU, in fact, the United States actu-
                                         ally followed a little bit the EU—one of the most impressive efforts in taking down a large
                                         section of Russian oligarchs, elites, proxies, members of the Duma, members of the Fed-
                                         eral Council, freezing Russian reserves, one of the most extraordinary forms of sanctions
                                         freezing, just straight up this 300 billion Russian war chest in euros and dollars—an
                                         almost unprecedented kind of sanction—freezing Russian financial system, sadly leaving
                                         energy open, which led us—you know, enabled Russia to continue making money for quite
                                         some time. There was an initial talk about a coal ban, which was in place pretty quickly.
                                         Then gas remained to be bought for quite some time until finally it was Russia, in fact,
                                         that cutoff the gas in an effort to try to freeze out the EU. Then of course, now we have
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     (1)




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00005   Fmt 3194    Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                         the oil cap. That is the most recent thing. Although the oil cap is much higher than we
                                         are currently trading. In fact, it is currently having no effect.
                                               Since then, there is really been no individualized sanctions or very few on a handful
                                         of mid-level individuals. We really need to see more of this. In that effort, we have mem-
                                         bers from five different countries on the line right now, led by Representative Steve Cohen
                                         of the Helsinki Commission—he is Co-chair of the Helsinki Commission—and then, of
                                         course, Ukrainian MP Oleksii Goncharenko, who have been putting together these letters
                                         with our partners around the world to pinpoint individuals that need to still be sanc-
                                         tioned. I mean, some of these individuals are truly conspicuous by their absence. One, of
                                         course, is the Ukrainian oligarch Roman or—Ukrainian—the Russian Abramovich, who
                                         still is not sanctioned by the United States, despite being sanctioned by the Ukraine and,
                                         you know, having all of his various assets around the world investigated and all these
                                         sorts of articles—and in fact, identifying where his assets are—sort of 10 billion in the
                                         Caymans, 10 billion in BVI, and so on and so forth to various hedge funds. Yet, we still
                                         do not have the sanctions on him. That is one example of the kind of individual we are
                                         trying to target here, trying to close the gaps and loopholes that have sprung up in the
                                         sanctions network.
                                               Really there could be—the primary reason for this could just be that we need to do
                                         so many different things in order to ensure that Russia is unable to wage this unprece-
                                         dented illegal, brutal war of aggression. So, I want to introduce sort of the five lawmakers
                                         that we are going to have speak today. They are going to go on the order of USA, Ukraine,
                                         U.K., Poland, and Estonia. We are first going to hear from Representative Steve Cohen.
                                         He is the Co-Chair of the Helsinki Commission and he is been the leader of these efforts,
                                         along with, second, Ukrainian parliament MP Oleksii Goncharenko. Then we are going
                                         to hear from our good friend, Bob Seely of the U.K. Parliament. We are then going to hear
                                         from Arkadiusz Mularczyk, the Polish deputy foreign minister, also an MP, given how the
                                         system works. Then, finally, we are going to hear from Estonian MP Eerik Kross.
                                               Together these individuals have already put together two powerful letters identifying
                                         individuals including Steven Seagal and Roman Abramovich, but many others who have
                                         yet to be sanctioned, who still are falling through the gaps of our sanctions framework.
                                         Then we hope we will be continuing to put these together and have others join in this
                                         effort as we try to push and help our executive branches and governments identify the
                                         individuals that have yet to be sanctioned. With that, I want to hand the floor to Rep-
                                         resentative Steve Cohen.
                                               Representative COHEN: Thank you, Paul, and thank you for all your work on this
                                         issue. You have certainly been a wonderful staffer for us in an effort to—all over the world
                                         to help Ukraine.
                                               This is part of Russia’s hybrid war on the world, not just on Ukraine, which obviously
                                         it is, but also on the world through the oligarchs who have taken over—taken all the Rus-
                                         sian assets or much of the Russian assets to their own personal benefit. Putin claims that
                                         Ukraine historically does not exist. He goes back to Peter the Great, and he goes back
                                         to all these different historical characters and conjures up the idea that Ukraine never
                                         existed. It is just part of Russia. The truth is, Russia never—does not exist. It is simply
                                         the Soviet Union broken up and stolen by some individuals, and oligarchs who have taken
                                         all the assets, ripped it off from the people, and Russia does not exist. There is not a Rus-
                                         sian country. There is this sham government, a sham group that has stolen all those
                                         assets. We need to put sanctions on those people to stop them from warring on Ukraine,
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     2




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00006   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                         and from eventually warring on all of the Western world, which is what Putin would do
                                         otherwise.
                                               He has—sanctions have worked, but they need to work more. The fact that
                                         Abramovich has not been sanctioned by the United States is appalling to me. I have
                                         encouraged it for a long time. He is obviously involved, and I think he is probably made
                                         some people in our State Department—I am guessing. I have no knowledge of what he
                                         has done or what is said—made him think that he is kind of a good asset, that he is
                                         helping—was going to—he was allegedly going to bring about peace because he was going
                                         to—you know, he has not done any of that. I think he is just doing whatever he can to
                                         keep his assets. He—so far he has kept his assets in good shape.
                                               He is—Steven Seagal, the same thing. He was over there in the hospitals testifying
                                         as to who was responsible for shooting up that prison. He had no knowledge. He did not
                                         know anything. He is a false guy, too. He is a Hollywood creation of a macho man. He
                                         is not a macho man. He is on his knees to Putin and on his knees to everybody to make
                                         money. He needs to be sanctioned as well.
                                               Sanctions do work, but they need to be improved upon. Russian oligarchs have—some
                                         have kind of had a mea culpa. The only reason they have had any kind of a mea culpa
                                         is because of sanctions. It is the money that makes it matter. Money matters to them.
                                         They say it is not the money. It is the money. Russians are losing hundreds of billions
                                         of dollars on a regular basis. The budget in Russia, GDP is falling, standard of living is
                                         falling. The Russian people are noticing that, all because of sanctions. It is the Russian
                                         people who have to bring down Putin. Eventually, he has to be lowered in the eyes of
                                         the Russians to where he will resign or not to have the strength that he has. That is going
                                         to come through the Russian people suffering. They have suffered with all the money put
                                         into the war machine and the people lost. Those are all losses for the Russian people that
                                         Putin has used. If they—you also have to help with reparations and rebuild Ukraine,
                                         which would be close to a trillion-dollar deal. If the moneys that we have in banks
                                         frozen—it is frozen, taken, and used for that purpose, that will hurt the Russian people
                                         too. The Russians have been hurt by all the missiles and all the money that is going into
                                         the war machine and not into the human machine. We need to strike at Putin’s entourage
                                         and lower his esteem with the Russian people. I think that is happening.
                                               We need to remember—I am big on history, so I remember Bill Browder today. Mr.
                                         Seely, Bill Browder’s Magnitsky law is kind of the beginning of sanctions, started. He is—
                                         it is right there at the beginning. Then our friend, Kara-Murza, who liked Navalny and
                                         so many other political prisoners have been taken by Russia because of their heroism and
                                         going back to fight for a free Russian State. The USA and the European Union, Britain,
                                         and Ukraine, countries in the European Union—or Britain and the European Union all
                                         impose sanctions against the—Putin.
                                               Sometimes the situation looks disorganized and incongruent, unfortunately, so we
                                         need to do more to make that not the case. The EU will impose sanctions while Britain
                                         and the U.S. on certain occasions. This we have seen with Abramovich and others, and
                                         that is why we are locked in this coalition to bring together the parliamentarians of the
                                         USA, the European Union, Ukraine, and Great Britain to synchronize our efforts. We will
                                         no longer be—have a haven for Russia’s corrupt and Putin’s elite. We have seen the
                                         yachts around the world that have been taken, but we can not finish up the job. They
                                         have got—the money they have got are just—and it is hard to talk about in a way that
                                         the oligarchs and all the money they have got, which they do, it is in my opinion unbeliev-
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     3




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00007   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                         able and obscene. Then Bezos is pretty wealthy. Musk with his rockets and Twitter, he
                                         is an evil person too. He is right there with Putin and Trump. Dangerous to the free
                                         world.
                                              Our group has written letters to Secretary Blinken and High Representative of the
                                         European Union. Mr. Borrell, called to impose sanctions as soon as possible as many Rus-
                                         sians were involved in the war in Ukraine: Abramovich, Vladimir Potanin, and Vladimir
                                         Lisin, are some of the richest Russians who do not have sanctions imposed on them yet.
                                         They are all on the Forbes list and they support Russia’s war against Ukraine with their
                                         money and their businesses, both overtly and covertly. Putin uses them as his wallet. We
                                         must do everything we can to ensure that there is not even a single penny in his wallet.
                                         Putin is the enemy. Putin is the problem. Putin is the Hitler of the 21st century. We must
                                         unite to stop him because he will not stop without our efforts. Thank you very much for
                                         this call and for your support, and God bless.
                                              Mr. MASSARO: Thank you very much, Rep. Cohen.
                                              I want to emphasize a point that you said about the confiscation of assets. I mean,
                                         we also—I think this group wants to keep its eye on enabling that confiscation, absolutely
                                         one of the most important initiatives to take Russia’s reserves, to take oligarch money,
                                         and to give it to Ukraine to ensure that, you know, Russia pays for the war. I know that
                                         that is something you have done a lot of legislation on, and thank you for that.
                                              MP Goncharenko.
                                              Mr. GONCHARENKO: Thank you very much. First of all, I would like to thank U.S.
                                         Congress Helsinki Commission, Representative Cohen, and Representative Wilson, and
                                         engine—great engine of our work Paul Massaro for all the work you are doing in support
                                         of Ukraine before February 24th and especially after February 24th. I think today we are
                                         making a new, very important step in this direction.
                                              First, it is clear that the situation with the sanctions is very important. Sanctions
                                         do work. They really work. Unfortunately, there are still loopholes in the sanctions, and
                                         so we need to fill these loopholes.
                                              Also, there is a problem of desynchronization because the United States of America
                                         has its own list of sanctioned persons, United Kingdom its own, European Union its own,
                                         and Ukraine its own. Certainly, it is the problem. That should be synchronized not to give
                                         any possibility for such people like Abramovich mentioned today, Lisin, I do not know,
                                         Kirkorov and other people who can just avoid the sanctions because they are in one juris-
                                         diction but not in others. It is something which should be changed.
                                              We—first, we created such a platform in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council
                                         of Europe. I am very grateful to my colleagues, Arkadius Mularczyk and Eerik Kross, and
                                         others with whom we started it. Then we—now we are making a real U.S.-European—
                                         U.S. Europe coalition, with involvement of U.S. Congressmen and United Kingdom MP.
                                         That is very important. In our next letters, we will also address the Foreign Secretary
                                         Cleverly, because the United Kingdom is very important in this work. We know this.
                                              We will continue our job. I am sure that we will have results on this. For sure it
                                         is not only about sanctions, but about freezing the assets and seizing of these assets in
                                         benefit of reconstruction of Ukraine, because it is not American taxpayers. It is not
                                         British, Polish, Estonian, Lithuanian taxpayers who should pay for this, for what was
                                         done by Russia and Ukraine. It is Russian oligarchs and Russia’s Putin, and all his wallet,
                                         he is perpetrating this, and other malign agents who did and who should pay for this.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     4




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00008   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                               Also in our coalition we have members of European Parliament, members of Foreign
                                         Affairs Committee, and Lithuanian Petras Austrevicius. Unfortunately, today he would
                                         not speak. He can just come—does not have this possibility. It is very important the Euro-
                                         pean Parliament is also in our coalition. There are a lot of to-dos. We need to work on
                                         Russian methodology, because they are still sending weapons to Europe.
                                               The same people who are producing Russian tanks and missiles, we need to work on
                                         Rosatom, a very big Russian industry which is not still under sanctions. It is also some-
                                         thing which should be changed. In general, we should say no safe haven, the great name
                                         of our meeting. The free world should not be the safe haven for Russian dirty money, for
                                         Russian malign agents, for criminals who are responsible for genocide in Ukraine, for
                                         killings in the United Kingdom, Czech Republic, Georgia, Syria, Africa, and all over the
                                         planet.
                                               Thank you very much, colleagues. I am sure that our work will be a very useful and
                                         practical step in order for free world to win this war. Thank you very much.
                                               Mr. MASSARO: Terrific. Thank you so much, Mr. Goncharenko.
                                               I think it is sort of no wonder that we have here the United States, Ukraine, Poland,
                                         and the U.K., seeing as when one goes back to even February 24th and shortly before,
                                         you know, these were the countries that were really on the ball, knew it was coming, were
                                         preparing Ukrainian defense. Since then, we have been some of the most proactive. That
                                         is why I want to hand the floor now to MP Bob Seely, who has been a real champion
                                         around this stuff, and sort of a personal friend of the Commission.
                                               MP Seely, please.
                                               Mr. SEELY: Well, thank you very much, indeed. I hope you can hear me okay. I apolo-
                                         gize about my darker room. We had a bit of a power cut in my bit of parliament at the
                                         moment. I can not blame President Putin, but it is the Victorian electricity system, which
                                         is unfortunately, letting us down. I have got no heating and no electricity. I feel like I
                                         should be in Odessa, but I am actually in London.
                                               Right. Thank you, first, to Congressman Cohen. Thank you, to Paul. Above all,
                                         thanks to Oleksii Goncharenko for this brilliant initiative. I think it is a really important
                                         one. We all need to be working together. Russia is a massive threat to the international
                                         system. It is a threat to the finance system, to the global system of treaties, to peace, at
                                         least in Europe, and in fact to peace throughout the world as we know it.
                                               Britain did move quickly to sanction people at the beginning of this war. It is also
                                         true to say that London was way too friendly to questionable Russian money as it flowed
                                         via to some, frankly, corrupt banks through the city of London, through other places, into
                                         tax havens in the Caribbean and elsewhere. Sanctions are working. As Oleksii and,
                                         indeed, Congressman Cohen said, the problem is with sanctions is that they are not syn-
                                         chronized.
                                               I think that is something that we can be doing by writing letters to not only Sec-
                                         retary of State Blinken but also Foreign Secretary James Cleverly, and our prime min-
                                         ister here to ask why if people like—if you have major players sanctioned in the European
                                         Union but not in the U.K., why? If you have major players sanctioned in the U.K. and
                                         the European Union but not in the U.S., why is that? We have to bring that pressure
                                         to bare. I think cooperation is now absolutely vital. We have to close those loopholes for
                                         Putin’s allies and, indeed Putin’s money to hide.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     5




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00009   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                              As I said, a number of loopholes currently threaten to undermine sanctions. I think
                                         one of the most interesting things with me is that as this war evolves, Russian tactics
                                         evolve. One of the problems that we are facing is that Russia is outsourcing some of its
                                         machine tool parts—machine tool factories to places like Armenia and Uzbekistan, which
                                         become more difficult to sanction. Also, apparently the importation of washing machines
                                         and refrigerators is going up very sharply from some countries into Russia, because
                                         Russia then strips out those white goods, takes them to pieces, and uses the electronics
                                         in them for missiles and other military components.
                                              We need to get wise and smart to what is happening and not only be systematically
                                         and comprehensively sanctioning individuals. Also understand how Russia is gaming the
                                         system in order to keep the flow of funds going by selling oil to non-Western countries,
                                         and then that oil finding its way into the Western markets, but also to see what is hap-
                                         pening with sales of civilian equipment that then gets stripped out and used for military
                                         purposes.
                                              As with all these things, information sharing is vital. Cooperation between Congress
                                         and Parliament, and the parliaments of the European Union, and very specifically the
                                         parliament in Ukraine, the Verkhovna Rada, is critical to our success. This is a very good
                                         start. What we need to do is now widen the group that we are, to get more people involved
                                         from more Countries, States, and Parliaments, to make sure that we act in unison to get
                                         this working. Thank you, to you all.
                                              Mr. MASSARO: Thank you very much, Mr. Seely. Thanks for highlighting the export
                                         controls. That was another one of, I think, the really enormous and interesting innova-
                                         tions around the way that we initially responded and, in one sense, will be the most
                                         powerful long-term sanctions, if we can actually hold to it. Because it does prevent the
                                         rebuildup of the Russian military machine.
                                              Finally, we have MP Deputy Foreign Minister of Poland Mularczyk.
                                              Minister MULARCZYK: Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Paul. Dear colleagues, I
                                         would like to thank the Helsinki Commission and our colleagues for the invitation to
                                         speak at this meeting. Let me start by saying, Poland strongly supports and will continue
                                         to support Ukraine in its attempts to repel the Russian aggression and in hosting 3.5 mil-
                                         lion Ukrainian citizens. Poland also provides direct and multidimensional support assist-
                                         ance to Ukraine. Poland is happy to be one of the biggest supporters of Ukraine, a country
                                         fighting not only for their freedom but also for Poland and Europe freedom.
                                              The aggression that we see in Ukraine now is something that also lives in our recent
                                         memories, our Polish memories. Until today, in Poland we have been discussing justice
                                         for the Second World War and the unresolved issue of reparation, a topic that will be
                                         increasingly relevant for Ukraine in the future. On the current war, which lead to our
                                         Second World War Report, will also prove valuable for Ukraine in the near future. The
                                         U.S. and Europe are living in a moment of strategical geopolitical change. This is some-
                                         thing that everyone should understand.
                                              The world must bring a strategic defeat for Russia in the battle of Ukraine. The EU
                                         and U.S. must take steps to isolate Russia internationally, impose restrictive measures
                                         against the Russian economy, target the countries involved in the war, including Iran and
                                         Belarus, continue supporting the Ukrainian people, and ensure accountability for viola-
                                         tions of international law and war crimes, and work within NATO and cooperate with
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     6




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00010   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                         other allies worldwide. We need to keep adopting further measures to increase our pres-
                                         sure and weaken the Russian war machine.
                                              Additional sectoral sanction shall include new export ban on ICT sector products and
                                         services and further businesses services ban. Moreover, we will have to adjust the oil price
                                         cap in order to further diminish Moscow’s revenue and respond to market developments.
                                         We shall also agree on new individual listing on oligarchs, Russian military industrial
                                         companies, Kremlin’s propaganda machine, and top commanders of the Russian armed
                                         forces. Also, we have to take steps in order to battle the circumvention of Western sanc-
                                         tions.
                                              I am encouraged by the use of such fora like the Helsinki Commission, that houses
                                         politicians from Europe, the U.S., the U.K., Poland, and from the part of our Europe, to
                                         meet and discuss such difficult topics and forge a way forward. Thank you, dear col-
                                         leagues.
                                              Mr. MASSARO: Well, thank you very much. Thank you also for highlighting Iran and
                                         Belarus. It is really critical that we keep these sort of states in mind that have been—
                                         I mean, in Belarus’s case, straight occupied. You know, almost an extension of the Rus-
                                         sian empire at this point. Iran, which has been an enormous spoiler and supporter of
                                         Russia. I think that when we think of how we—how we sanctions and how we, you know,
                                         cutoff these states that are helping the Russian genocide effort, that is something we
                                         really need to focus on.
                                              Thank you so very much to our lawmakers here. The U.S.-Europe Coalition on Rus-
                                         sian Sanctions is hereby established. We are really looking forward to further letters and
                                         further work on this stuff. With that, we are going to close. Thank you so much.
                                              [Whereupon, at 9:01 a.m., the briefing ended.]


                                                                                                                     Æ
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     7




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00011   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 6011   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
                                                        This is an official publication of the Commission on
                                                              Security and Cooperation in Europe.
                                                                                                            ★ ★ ★
                                                                      This publication is intended to document
                                                                      developments and trends in participating
                                                                       States of the Organization for Security
                                                                        and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
                                                                                                            ★ ★ ★
                                                      All Commission publications may be freely reproduced,
                                                      in any form, with appropriate credit. The Commission
                                                        encourages the widest possible dissemination of its
                                                                          publications.
                                                                                                            ★ ★ ★
                                                                        www.csce.gov                                    @HelsinkiComm
                                                          The Commission’s Web site provides access
                                                            to the latest press releases and reports,
                                                         as well as hearings and briefings. Using the
                                                    Commission’s electronic subscription service, readers are
                                                       able to receive press releases, articles, and other
                                                      materials by topic or countries of particular interest.
                                                                                          Please subscribe today.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:09 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00012   Fmt 3190   Sfmt 3190   C:\SEALS\50-674.XXX   KEMA
