                                          117th CONGRESS                                                                                        Printed for the use of the
                                          2nd Session                                                                   Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe




                                         Conflict of Interest? Foreign Policy and
                                                Human Rights in Turkey




                                                                                                    FEBRUARY 16, 2022


                                                                                       Briefing of the
                                                                      Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe

                                                                                                          Washington: 2023
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                                                                                                CSCESeal.EPS




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00001   Fmt 3191   Sfmt 3191   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                                                      Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
                                                                               234 Ford House Office Building
                                                                                    Washington, DC 20515
                                                                                        202–225–1901
                                                                                    csce@mail.house.gov
                                                                                     http://www.csce.gov
                                                                                       @HelsinkiComm




                                                                                       Legislative Branch Commissioners

                                                    SENATE                                                                                HOUSE
                                         BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, MARYLAND                                                         STEVE COHEN, TENNESSEE
                                           Chairman                                                                             Co-Chairman
                                         ROGER F. WICKER, MISSISSIPPI Ranking                                                 JOE WILSON, SOUTH CAROLINA Ranking
                                           Member                                                                                Member
                                         JOHN BOOZMAN, ARKANSAS                                                               ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, ALABAMA
                                         CORY GARDNER, COLORADO                                                               EMANUEL CLEAVER II, MISSOURI
                                         MARCO RUBIO, FLORIDA                                                                 BRIAN FITZPATRICK, PENNSYLVANIA
                                         JEANNE SHAHEEN, NEW HAMPSHIRE                                                        ALCEE L. HASTINGS, FLORIDA
                                         THOM TILLIS, NORTH CAROLINA                                                          RICHARD HUDSON, NORTH CAROLINA
                                         TOM UDALL, NEW MEXICO                                                                GWEN MOORE, WISCONSIN
                                         SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, RHODE ISLAND                                                     MARC VEASEY, TEXAS

                                                                                        Executive Branch Commissioners

                                                                                      DEPARTMENT OF STATE, to be appointed
                                                                                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, to be appointed
                                                                                    DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, to be appointed




                                                                                                                 [II]
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     (2)




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00002   Fmt 3193         Sfmt 3193   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                             ABOUT THE ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE

                                              The Helsinki process, formally titled the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
                                         Europe, traces its origin to the signing of the Helsinki Final Act in Finland on August
                                         1, 1975, by the leaders of 33 European countries, the United States and Canada. As of
                                         January 1, 1995, the Helsinki process was renamed the Organization for Security and
                                         Cooperation in Europe [OSCE].
                                              The membership of the OSCE has expanded to 57 participating States, reflecting the
                                         breakup of the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.
                                              The OSCE Secretariat is in Vienna, Austria, where weekly meetings of the partici-
                                         pating States’ permanent representatives are held. In addition, specialized seminars and
                                         meetings are convened in various locations. Periodic consultations are held among Senior
                                         Officials, Ministers and Heads of State or Government.
                                              Although the OSCE continues to engage in standard setting in the fields of military
                                         security, economic and environmental cooperation, and human rights and humanitarian
                                         concerns, the Organization is primarily focused on initiatives designed to prevent, manage
                                         and resolve conflict within and among the participating States. The Organization deploys
                                         numerous missions and field activities located in Southeastern and Eastern Europe, the
                                         Caucasus, and Central Asia. The website of the OSCE is: <www.osce.org>.

                                                 ABOUT THE COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE

                                              The Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, also known as the Helsinki
                                         Commission, is an independent U.S. Government commission created in 1976 to monitor
                                         and encourage compliance by the participating States with their OSCE commitments,
                                         with a particular emphasis on human rights.
                                              The Commission consists of nine members from the United States Senate, nine mem-
                                         bers from the House of Representatives, and one member each from the Departments of
                                         State, Defense and Commerce. The positions of Chair and Co-Chair rotate between the
                                         Senate and House every two years, when a new Congress convenes. A professional staff
                                         assists the Commissioners in their work.
                                              In fulfilling its mandate, the Commission gathers and disseminates relevant informa-
                                         tion to the U.S. Congress and the public by convening hearings, issuing reports that
                                         reflect the views of Members of the Commission and/or its staff, and providing details
                                         about the activities of the Helsinki process and developments in OSCE participating
                                         States.
                                              The Commission also contributes to the formulation and execution of U.S. policy
                                         regarding the OSCE, including through Member and staff participation on U.S. Delega-
                                         tions to OSCE meetings. Members of the Commission have regular contact with
                                         parliamentarians, government officials, representatives of non-governmental organiza-
                                         tions, and private individuals from participating States. The website of the Commission
                                         is: <www.csce.gov>.

                                                                                                                 [III]
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00003   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         Conflict of Interest? Foreign Policy and Human Rights in Turkey

                                                                                                         FEBRUARY 16, 2022




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page

                                                                                         COMMITTEE MEMBERS PRESENT:


                                         Representative Steve Cohen [D-TN], Co-Chairman .....................................................................                                       1

                                                                                            COMMITTEE STAFF PRESENT:


                                         Bakhti Nishanov, Senior Policy Advisor, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Eu-
                                           rope ...............................................................................................................................................     1

                                                                                                           PARTICIPANTS


                                         Soner Cagaptay, Director, Turkish Research Program, Washington Institute for the Near
                                           East; .............................................................................................................................................      3
                                         Deniz Yuksel, Turkey Advocacy Specialist, Amnesty International ...........................................                                                7




                                                                                                                       [IV]
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                         (4)




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023    Jkt 000000   PO 00000     Frm 00004    Fmt 3193         Sfmt 3193   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                                 Conflict of Interest? Foreign Policy and Human Rights in
                                                                           Turkey



                                                                                                  February 16, 2022



                                                               Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
                                                                               Washington, DC


                                              The briefing was held from 11:01 a.m. to 12:16 p.m. via videoconference, Bakhti
                                         Nishanov, Senior Policy Advisor, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, pre-
                                         siding.


                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you so much for joining
                                         us this morning.
                                              My name is Bakhti Nishanov. I am a senior policy advisor at the U.S. Helsinki
                                         Commission. Today we are going to have a discussion—what we think is a very important
                                         and timely conversation about Turkey.
                                              Before I launch into why we set this up, I first of all would like to acknowledge our
                                         Co-chairman, Helsinki Commission Co-Chairman Mr. Cohen, and he has joined us this
                                         morning, and we really appreciate that. Maybe before we start—I know you have an
                                         incredibly busy schedule—I would like to offer you an opportunity to offer your remarks,
                                         sir.
                                              Co-chair COHEN: Well, thank you very much. I appreciate the opportunity to partici-
                                         pate.
                                              I have been the Co-chair of the Turkey Caucus since I came to Congress in 2007.
                                         I think the origins of that—I am not positive how that occurred exactly, but my grand-
                                         father, who I did not know and to be honest my mother I do not think knew, was from
                                         Turkey, as indicated from records I have seen on Ancestry.com. Abraham Hassan [sp] was
                                         from Turkey, and so I am a young Turk. [Laughter.] I visited Turkey once. I would like
                                         to go back again. It was—I enjoyed my trip to Istanbul, of course, and to Ankara, where
                                         I really fell in love with the monument to Ataturk, and I am a big fan of Ataturk’s. He
                                         was an amazing man.
                                              There have been concerns I have had about Turkey’s descent, I guess, concerning
                                         human rights over the years, and most recent I guess—it has been gradual, but the last
                                         four or 5 years have been even greater—judges who have been arrested, public officials
                                         who have been arrested, press who have been arrested. Turkey does not have a good
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 (1)




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00005   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         record on human rights, and I regret that. Mr. Erdogan has certain characteristics that
                                         are concerning about power and about reestablishing Turkey as some type of an Ottoman
                                         Empire to some extent.
                                               Anyway, I am looking forward to your testimony. We need to do what we can to see
                                         that the whole world is fair for citizens to express themselves and to—press to express
                                         themselves and for people to get information, without which we will not have good democ-
                                         racies. With that, I yield back my balance of my time.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Thank you so much, Co-Chairman Cohen. Really appreciate your per-
                                         sonal story, and I think this gives extra meaning to your participation in this briefing
                                         today.
                                               Just to set the stage a little bit for this conversation, I said timely. The reason for
                                         that, I think—obviously, I set it up, so I would say that it is timely. I think if you follow
                                         Turkey or Eurasia or the Middle East, you will have noted that Turkey has been in the
                                         news in the headlines a lot lately. I mean, even if you do not follow it but you watched
                                         the Super Bowl this past weekend, you will have noticed that, you know, Turkish Airlines
                                         was very prominently featured in a pregame show. They were a part —they were spon-
                                         sors, actually, of the pregame show, and they were very—it was—you know, Turkey is
                                         a part of a conversation that is happening worldwide and here in the United—[audio
                                         break]—too much because we want to hear it from panelists. I think I would like just
                                         to sort of set it up just a little bit and understand why we are having this.
                                               Things that are happening in Turkey I think I would like to describe as the good,
                                         the bad, and the ugly, right? The good is, on the foreign policy front, we are very much
                                         encouraged by Turkey’s efforts to normalize its relationship with Armenia. That is been
                                         in the news. That is great. We have seen Turkey-Israel relationship improve. In fact, the
                                         president of Israel is going to be visiting Turkey on March 9. With Egypt, with UAE, with
                                         all the neighbors we have seen this effort to normalize ties and to be a—[audio break]—
                                         and responsible partner to the neighbors, but also within the context of NATO and OSCE.
                                               We also appreciate Turkey’s hosting the world’s largest population of refugees. I
                                         mean, this should not go unacknowledged. Turkey is—has this heavy burden, and I think
                                         it is important that we acknowledge that and we do as a global community whatever we
                                         can do to support Turkey in this effort.
                                               The bad side is, just like even by COVID standards—by COVID—[inaudible]—
                                         standards, I think Turkey has had a very difficult 2021. The economy plunged. We saw
                                         the currency plunge. Officially, I believe, the inflation rate was almost close to 50 percent,
                                         and just incredible pain—economic pain that COVID caused. Frankly, some of the govern-
                                         ance issues that Turkey has experienced, right—independence of the central bank came
                                         under question—some of these issues are self-made. Those are that side of things.
                                               I think the other side of things, I think as Mr. Cohen talked about, is the human
                                         rights record. Turkey is an important NATO ally and a founding member of the Organiza-
                                         tion of Security and Cooperation in Europe. As such, it has taken upon itself major
                                         commitments on upholding human rights for its own citizens. This is not about United
                                         States. This is not about OSCE. This is about Turkey and its own citizens. Unfortunately,
                                         what we have seen, we see continued arrest of journalists, including on Article 299, the
                                         controversial insulting the president. We see people still languishing in prisons on dubious
                                         charges. We see, frankly, a strong anti-immigrant sentiment—which, again, it is a com-
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     2




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00006   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         plex issue, but that resulted in some of the attacks against Syrian-owned businesses and
                                         Syrian—[audio break].
                                              All of this is with a background of Turkey saying that it wants—reiterating time and
                                         again. Last month, President Erdogan talked—met with Ambassadors of EU, said EU’s—
                                         Turkey’s path is toward the EU. The commitment to join EU yet not upholding these
                                         values is—seems like a contradiction. That is why we call this a conflict of—conflict of
                                         interest, a question mark. I mean, there are all these issues happening, but what is going
                                         on and how can we understand Turkey’s motivation? If we can understand them better,
                                         can we help Turkey—just like any other country, it has its own issues—to live up to
                                         standards that it has taken upon itself?
                                              That is the—that is the briefing. That is what we want to do. I think it is very impor-
                                         tant that—the prism through which we are looking at this. Turkey is an important NATO
                                         ally, but it is important for friends to have conversations—honest and frank conversa-
                                         tions—and this is what it is all about. It is toward an eye to improvement, to getting a
                                         better relationship that we are holding this briefing.
                                              Without further ado, I would like to introduce our—today’s excellent panelists. I am
                                         sure if you—again, you have been following this world, you know both of them.
                                              First, we have Soner Cagaptay. He is the director of Turkish Research Program at
                                         the Washington Institute. You have seen his multiple books he is an author of, fantastic.
                                         I highly recommend his books. He has written extensively on the U.S.-Turkish relation-
                                         ship, Turkish domestic politics, and Turkish nationalism. He is a columnist for Turkey’s
                                         oldest and most influential English-language paper and he is a contributor to CNN. His
                                         books have been translated. They are in English, but into Turkish, Italian, Greek, and
                                         Croatian. Thank you, Soner, for joining us this morning.
                                              We also have Deniz Yuksel. Deniz is a Turkey advocacy specialist at Amnesty Inter-
                                         national. She previously had conducted research on Turkish foreign policy in the Middle
                                         East and the U.S.-Turkey relationship, Turkish domestic politics, refugees, human rights,
                                         and religious freedom. She—prior to that, she designed and actually taught a human
                                         rights education course in partnership with the Mother Child Education Foundation in
                                         Istanbul, Turkey.
                                              These are our panelists. What our—our whole thing is to have them, our witnesses,
                                         present their testimoneys this morning, and then I am really hoping for a lively Q&A con-
                                         versation. Just a note on that: Please submit your questions to everyone in the chat box
                                         so that way I can see them and I will address them to our witnesses.
                                              Thank you so much. Soner, we are going to start with you. If you could just lay out
                                         the framework for Turkish foreign policy, and then we can—we are going to go to Deniz,
                                         talk about domestic human rights, and see if we can connect them up, and how we can
                                         use one to nudge the other. Soner?
                                              Mr. CAGAPTAY: Thank you so much, Bakhti. I wanted to start by, of course, thanking
                                         you for setting this up. When you first contacted me to set up this conversation a while
                                         ago, there was no looming war in Ukraine. Indeed, Turkey’s importance to the U.S. con-
                                         tinues because Turkey sits in a neighborhood surrounded by Iran, Iraq, Syria, formerly
                                         ISIS-held territories, and, across the Black Sea, Russia. So whatever U.S. policies are
                                         regarding those four countries and ISIS the entity, they are much easier with Turkey
                                         onboard and less cumbersome and more effective. I think it is really important, as you
                                         said, to see bigger engagement with Turkey in these areas, but also important to see that
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     3




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00007   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         Turkey’s democracy in the meantime, you know, perhaps recovers. Thanks again for set-
                                         ting up this conversation.
                                              I also wanted to thank Co-Chair Mr. Cohen for joining us this morning. I know he
                                         is very busy.
                                              I am especially flattered to be on the same panel with Deniz Yuksel, whose work I
                                         am a great fan of. What I would ask to do this morning is to have a discussion a little
                                         bit on Turkish domestic politics, but more on the foreign policy side, and then—and then
                                         turn the mic over to Deniz.
                                              I think on the domestic side, of course, the biggest story is that Turkish President
                                         Erdogan, after he had an impressive run as prime minister and president for almost 20
                                         years, has sort of run to the end of his popularity. This has a lot to do with Erdogan’s
                                         quite bright economic record until recently. He won, through his party—Justice and
                                         Development Party, AKP—over a dozen nationwide elections on a platform of strong eco-
                                         nomic growth. Erdogan lifted many people out of poverty. He has increased access to serv-
                                         ices, improved access to the pie. There is a bright side to his legacy and that has helped
                                         him win over a dozen nationwide polls.
                                              Turkey’s economy under Erdogan went into recession for the first time in 2018, and
                                         that’s the main reason why he lost the elections for Istanbul, Ankara, and other big cities.
                                         The economy has exited recession, but the macro indicators do not look very good. Infla-
                                         tion is skyrocketing, the highest it has been since Erdogan came to power; unemployment
                                         is rising; and there is a general sense of establishment fatigue, I guess, linked to the
                                         Erdogan administration that, yes, he may have been the problem solver and the face of
                                         change in Turkey once, but not anymore. That has to do with the opposition being resil-
                                         ient, especially since the—winning Istanbul and Ankara and other big cities in local elec-
                                         tions.
                                              I think that one of important takeaways of Turkey under Erdogan—and Bakhti men-
                                         tioned I have written Erdogan’s biography, ‘‘New Sultan,’’ which I have highlighted in
                                         that book also; shameless plug, of course, I have a book in the background—I think that
                                         one of the lessons of Turkey in the last 20 years under Erdogan is that the lesson that
                                         this country provides is the opposite of Iraq and Afghanistan. If the lessons of Iraq and
                                         Afghanistan were that it takes a really long time to build a democracy, the lesson of Tur-
                                         key under Erdogan is that it also takes a really long time to kill one. Turkish democracy
                                         is resilient. It is not dead. Elections matter, and elections are next year, 2023, and unless
                                         Mr. Erdogan delivers phenomenal economic growth and restores his base again it is very
                                         unlikely that he is going to win those elections.
                                              I think that, of course, that does not mean Mr. Erdogan is going to create a fair
                                         playing field. He controls over 90 percent of the media. That is his illiberal side. His
                                         bright side is economic growth. Of course, he is also a nativist populist leader. He has
                                         cracked down on demographics unlikely to vote for him, brutalized them. Over the years,
                                         he has eliminated checks and balances. He now appoints the majority of judges to the
                                         high courts without a confirmation process. As I said earlier, 90 percent of the media is
                                         controlled by businesses tied to him or linked to him. The race for the next election,
                                         unfortunately, will not be fair, but it will be free.
                                              That is where Turkey’s different than the country that most people like to compare
                                         it to, Russia. I think that is a false analogy when it comes to the country’s democratic
                                         record. What happened in Turkey in 2019, Erdogan losing elections in big cities to liberal
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     4




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00008   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         opposition mayors, could never happen under Putin’s Russia. Such a thing has happened
                                         in other countries nearby such as in Hungary and Poland, where similarly autocratic
                                         leaders—Orbán and Kaczynski and Duda and their allies—have lost Budapest and War-
                                         saw to liberal opposition mayors, respectively.
                                               One of the reasons I love studying Turkey and writing about it is that I believe if
                                         countries were vegetables, Turkey would be the analytical onion, meaning it does not have
                                         an analytical core. You analyze it, you think you got to it, and it evades you.
                                               Here is a case study. Turkey under Erdogan, unfortunately, is not a full democracy,
                                         but it is also not a dictatorship. I think that is simplistic to call it as such. I think Turkey
                                         is a democracy that has fallen under an autocrat. Just as in Hungary and Poland, there
                                         is great potential for this democratic resilience to kick back. Of course, the big issue there
                                         is that the opposition is now not only resilient since their victories in big cities, but also
                                         unified.
                                               I would say President Erdogan’s biggest mistake in domestic politics to date was his
                                         switch to an executive-style Presidential system in 2018. Now, the system was supposed
                                         to make him more powerful. Hypothetically, it did. It increased his powers. He is now
                                         head of state; head of government; head of the police, which is a national force; head of
                                         ruling party. Never before in Turkey’s history of having had—being a multiparty democ-
                                         racy—and the country held its first elections in 1950—has an elected leader accumulated
                                         so much power. Ironically, the switch to this new system, Presidential system, has also
                                         unified Erdogan’s opposition, because prior to that there was a parliamentary democratic
                                         system, multiparty race. Six or even more parties competed and Erdogan’s party, AKP,
                                         could always win elections, sometimes with as little as a third of the popular vote. That
                                         is not the case anymore. Now he has to win half of the popular vote. Not only is that
                                         impossible for him mathematically, but also the opposition, which was constituted by dis-
                                         parate groups of Kurdish and Turkish nationalists and liberals and conservatives who
                                         hated each other, realized that the switch to a Presidential system requires a two-way
                                         race and if they do not unify they will disappear. The opposition is coalescing, and I think
                                         that is Mr. Erdogan’s biggest challenge.
                                               Of course, Erdogan is a very smart political player and I think we should not under-
                                         estimate his next moves. I think while trying to restore economic growth he will, unfortu-
                                         nately, probably also implement more autocratic measures. Deniz is more of an expert on
                                         these and I am sure she will do a better job of explaining them than I can. I wanted to
                                         look at Mr. Erdogan’s foreign policy a little bit before I finish, and this is, I think, also
                                         important because we are seeing a sort of a pivot in Turkish foreign policy.
                                               You know, Ankara is trying to restore ties with its Gulf—rich Gulf neighbors,
                                         Emiratis and Saudis, as well as with Israel, with which ties ruptured in 2010 during the
                                         flotilla incident and never recovered, really, fully since. I think that is driven by a sense
                                         of isolation, that some of these foreign policy adventures in the Middle East have left Tur-
                                         key more isolated than before. I agree with that. I think Turkey’s more isolated in the
                                         Middle East today than it has ever been since the collapse of the Ottoman Empire. That
                                         is ironic because about 10 years ago, when Mr. Erdogan launched the foreign policy, the
                                         idea was that Turkey should just not be second fiddle to the West; it should go to the
                                         Middle East, where it can become a star-power nation by and through leadership of
                                         Muslim-majority countries. This was supposed to make Turkey the leading country in the
                                         Middle East. Now, of course, Turkey is really an isolated country except for Qatar and
                                         the internationally recognized government of Libya. It has no friends and allies, so it is
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     5




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00009   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         trying to reset with the Israelis, Egyptians, Emiratis, and Saudis. I think those are going
                                         to move forward.
                                              There is an important—another part of Mr. Erdogan’s pivot: It is to the United States
                                         and Europe. Bakhti mentioned that, and I think that is important for us to highlight. It
                                         has a lot to do with a very basic fact. I would say in the last 10 years Mr. Erdogan has
                                         made efforts to change Turkey’s identity at home toward a more Islamic one and not so
                                         secular, and internationally toward a Middle Eastern one and not so European. As I said
                                         earlier, Turkey is the analytical onion. I think Turkey’s identity can never be one. It has
                                         got multiple identities. I would say in these efforts Mr. Erdogan has only had limited suc-
                                         cess. Turkey retains its nonbinary and multiple identities.
                                              There is a fact. Let us say Mr. Erdogan has succeeded to an extent to change Tur-
                                         key’s identity at home to an Islamic one and internationally to a Middle Eastern one. Tur-
                                         key’s economy is completely integrated with that of the European Union because of cus-
                                         toms union in place since 1995 and as a resource-poor country Turkey needs financial
                                         inflows to grow again. Enter ties with the United States.
                                              Bismarck once famously said Turkey’s the east if you come from the west and west
                                         if you come from the east, which means when investors decide if they are going to put
                                         money into Turkey they do not just look at macro indicators; they also look at where Tur-
                                         key’s heading. They do not want to be worried about Turkey leaving the West or heading
                                         in another direction, and I think because of that Mr. Erdogan wants to establish a nar-
                                         rative of good ties with President Biden. He is been very patient in establishing that rela-
                                         tionship. It took President Biden 92 days to call President Erdogan after taking office here
                                         in Washington. Usually, presidents here when they take office call Turkey within weeks
                                         or 2 weeks at max, so that was quite a delayed call. When Mr. Biden called, he did not
                                         call President Erdogan to say, how are you, can we have a chat or meeting. He called
                                         to say, oh, I am going to recognize the Armenian genocide. Erdogan’s reaction was not,
                                         oh, how dare you, but he said, oh, can we still meet.
                                              You see that he is really patient to establish a narrative of good ties with the U.S.,
                                         and there are some foreign policy openings in this regard. Afghanistan could have been
                                         one. Turkey wanted to run the airport in Kabul. That would have been an important life-
                                         line with coalition embassies and the outside world. Unfortunately, Taliban, you know,
                                         bookended those dreams or that vision and—by taking the airport and the city before Tur-
                                         key could step in to run the airport. But Ukraine, I think, provides now a really important
                                         area of cooperation.
                                              I can only remember until a few months ago people would be writing op-eds saying
                                         let us kick Turkey out of NATO. I do not think you can publish such an op-ed in any
                                         major U.S. newspaper now because everybody’s wondering what Turkey will do in the
                                         Ukraine crisis to help the United States. Turkey’s identity as a NATO member has been
                                         recognized and underlined again. I think that is very important. Turkey also appreciates
                                         NATO.
                                              Ukraine is an interesting area because Turkey has very strong ties with Ukraine,
                                         robust. Sells drones, which Ukraine uses to attack Russian separatists as well as Russian
                                         hardware threatening the country. Turkey also has to balance its ties with Ukraine with
                                         its, you know, important relationship with Russia. I would—I will say the following
                                         three—I will leave you guys with the following three assertions before I turn the floor to
                                         Deniz, in terms of Turkey’s Ukraine policy.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     6




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00010   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                               No. 1, Turkey will not deny Russia with access to the Black Sea through the Bos-
                                         porus. It will keep its policy of kind of try not to anger the military giant to the north.
                                               No. 2, Turkey will adopt a neutral tone. If there is a conflict and war, it will, you
                                         know, basically have a middle-of-the-line rhetoric. Behind closed doors—and we may not
                                         see this or read about it in the media—Turkey will support Kyiv militarily. I think that
                                         is a very important takeaway for the U.S. Government and others on the Hill, that, you
                                         know, this is really, I think, going to be an important indigenous area of U.S.-Turkish
                                         cooperation, because Turkey views Ukraine’s sovereignty important for a variety of rea-
                                         sons. Tatars who live on the Crimean Peninsula, recently annexed illegally by Russia, are
                                         linked to Turks ethnically and religiously, and Turkey will never accept, therefore, Rus-
                                         sia’s annexation of Crimea. It will always defend Ukraine’s sovereignty.
                                               Also, Turkey sees Ukraine as it sees other Black Sea countries, as important partners
                                         in establishing a balance of power against Russia in the Black Sea. Russia is a giant navy
                                         military power, nuclear power of course. So Turkey sees not just Ukraine, but Romania,
                                         Bulgaria, Georgia, Moldova, all around the Black Sea as important partners, and it will
                                         not allow Ukraine to fall under Russia or Kyiv to be flipped by a coup or other kind of
                                         Russian intervention.
                                               I think this is really important for us to look at moving forward. With that, let me
                                         end and turn the floor over to Deniz.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Thank you so much, Soner. I really, really appreciate that.
                                               Deniz, please.
                                               Mr. YUKSEL: Thank you very much. It is a pleasure to be here speaking alongside
                                         my esteemed colleagues and, of course, Dr. Cagaptay, who I have had the pleasure of
                                         working with before joining Amnesty. Of course, thank you, Chairman Cohen, so much
                                         for joining this very timely conversation today.
                                               Today, I actually want to draw your attention to what I feel very comfortable at this
                                         point referring to as Turkey’s human rights crisis. This crisis began in 2015 with the col-
                                         lapse of the fragile peace process between the Turkish State and the armed Kurdistan
                                         Worker’s Party, the PKK, and it intensified following a failed coup attempt in July 2016.
                                         The Turkish government declared a State of emergency, granting the executive branch
                                         dangerous powers. Constitutional changes adopted in this period under the State of emer-
                                         gency extended executive control over the institution responsible for the appointment and
                                         dismissal of judges and prosecutors. These developments have seriously undermined the
                                         independence and integrity of the Turkish judicial system and, consequently, human
                                         rights.
                                               The State of emergency ended in 2018, but new laws ensured that the executive
                                         branch could retain these broad powers and continue exercising control over an increas-
                                         ingly partisan judiciary. In fact, you will learn from the rest of my testimony that abusive
                                         judicial practices are at the center of Turkey’s human rights crisis. From the record-
                                         breaking imprisonment of journalists to the persecution of LGBTI people, an ongoing
                                         crisis of gender-based violence, and the unlawful deportation of refugees, the failures of
                                         Turkey’s judicial system cut across societal lines and undermine the human rights of all.
                                               Opposition politicians, lawyers, journalists, human rights defenders, and academics
                                         are among scores of people imprisoned for months and sometimes even years pending trial
                                         in Turkey, often without any evidence of wrongdoing. The government uses overly broad
                                         terrorism laws to crack down on real and perceived opponents. The imprisonment of high-
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     7




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00011   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         profile critics has had a chilling effect on Turkish society more broadly, sending a dan-
                                         gerous message that anyone who dares to speak out will suffer the same fate.
                                              Turkey’s partisan judiciary routinely targets lawfully elected opposition politicians,
                                         particularly in the country’s mainly Kurdish southeast. Two former Co-chairs of the pro-
                                         Kurdish People’s Democratic Party, the HDP, Selahattin Demirtas and Figen Yuksekdag,
                                         remain imprisoned, convicted of terrorism charges, which in the absence of credible evi-
                                         dence, were largely based on their public speeches. Dozens of HDP members continue to
                                         be prosecuted, and the party itself faces a highly problematic closure case, ahead general
                                         elections in 2023.
                                              Amnesty International has documented credible reports that indicate an increase in
                                         allegations of torture and other ill-treatment in detention. In September 2020, two vil-
                                         lagers in the eastern Van province suffered severe injuries after being detained by soldiers
                                         and boarded on a helicopter. The soldiers involved in the incident reported that the man
                                         had attempted to escape by jumping off the helicopter, but in reality they would been sub-
                                         jected to a brutal beating by the soldiers. One of the men, Servet Turgut, later died of
                                         his injuries, and journalists who covered the case were detained. More than a year later,
                                         there has been little progress in investigating these allegations and ensuring that per-
                                         petrators are brought to justice.
                                              Those who call out such abuses in Turkey risk being persecuted themselves, mired
                                         in the government’s crackdown on civil society. Since the 2016 coup attempt, authorities
                                         have shuttered hundreds of NGO’s, depriving those that need them of vital support.
                                         Among them are Kurds, LGBTI people, survivors of gender-based violence, children, and
                                         refugees. The government uses anti-terror laws to attack human rights defenders,
                                         including Amnesty Turkey staff and members, all in an effort to criminalize peaceful
                                         activism.
                                              Turkish philanthropist and human rights defender Osman Kavala has spent over 4
                                         years in pretrial detention, despite calls from the U.S. and EU for his release. Osman
                                         Kavala is a peaceful civil society leader who had dedicated his life to promoting dialog
                                         between Turkey’s Muslim Turkish majority and Kurdish, Armenian, and other minorities.
                                         Kavala’s case is well known not just because of his celebrated civil society work, but also
                                         because of the deliberate cruelty of his legal ordeal. In February 2020, a Turkish court
                                         acquitted Kavala and ordered his release, but he was quickly rearrested in a separate,
                                         but equally baseless, case. This glimpse of freedom must have been unimaginably painful
                                         for his friends and family, who just hours earlier had celebrated his release in a crowded
                                         courtroom.
                                              Kavala’s case is emblematic of thousands of people arbitrarily detained in Turkish
                                         prisons in the context of these politically motivated charges. The European Court of
                                         Human Rights has made judgments calling on Turkey to release a number of these polit-
                                         ical detainees, including Osman Kavala and Selahattin Demirtas. Although the court’s
                                         decisions are binding, Turkish authorities have refused to implement them, and continue
                                         to unlawfully imprison both men. In fact, Turkish official, including President Recep
                                         Tayyip Erdogan, have repeatedly asserted that these rulings do not apply to Turkey. Of
                                         course, these statements are verifiably false, and have implications beyond these two
                                         cases. They obstruct Turkish courts’ treaty obligation to accept the jurisdiction of the
                                         European Court of Human Rights.
                                              Further, Turkey’s persistent non-implementation of ECHR judgments threatens the
                                         authority of the European Human Rights System more broadly. If Turkey can reject these
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     8




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00012   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         judgments without consequence, why not Hungary, Poland, or others? That is why
                                         Amnesty International welcomed the Council of Europe’s decision this month to launch
                                         infringement proceedings in the case of Kavala v. Turkey. We hope that the potential con-
                                         sequences of infringement—which range from the suspension of Turkey’s voting rights to
                                         expulsion from the Council altogether—will provide incentive for Turkish authorities to
                                         free Osman Kavala and end this incomprehensible injustice once and for all.
                                               Despite the Turkish government’s efforts to criminalize peaceful dissent, Turkey is
                                         still home to a resilient civil society. Human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists, and
                                         everyday people continue to risk their freedom and well-being to protest the government’s
                                         human rights abuses. The U.S. Government must stand in solidarity with them, and sup-
                                         port their efforts to create a more free, a more just, and stable Turkey. The Biden
                                         administration’s stated commitment to upholding universal rights at home and abroad is
                                         welcome. In Turkey too, the United States should put human rights first.
                                               All U.S. officials at all levels must raise human rights concerns in every engagement
                                         with Turkish authorities, as well as in every speech and every statement on Turkey. A
                                         stronger focus on human rights will not hurt other U.S. interests and, most importantly,
                                         it is the right thing to do. Specifically, the U.S. Government should urge Turkish authori-
                                         ties to respect judicial independence, bring anti-terror legislation in line with inter-
                                         national law and, of course, end the crackdown on peaceful dissent. U.S. officials should
                                         call on Turkey to promptly implement ECHR judgments, including by releasing Osman
                                         Kavala and Selahattin Demirtas.
                                               U.S. diplomats should convey to Turkish authorities that banning the HDP, Turkey’s
                                         third-largest political party, would be a major step backward for freedom of expression,
                                         and severely damage the prospects for a peaceful and enduring resolution to the conflict
                                         between Turkish authorities and the PKK. The U.S. should call on the Turkish govern-
                                         ment to launch prompt investigations into all allegations of torture and other human
                                         rights abuses and detention. The U.S. Ambassador to Turkey and his staff should meet
                                         regularly with local human rights defenders and CSO representatives and make public
                                         statements of support. They should visit activists in prison and attend trials of human
                                         rights defenders and civil society activists.
                                               There are also specific actions Members of Congress can take to address Turkey’s
                                         human rights crisis. Members should support a public hearing which highlights the
                                         Turkish government’s human rights abuses and includes the testimonies of affected
                                         communities. Members should participate in the Lantos Commission Defending Freedoms
                                         Project, and advocate on behalf of prisoners of conscience from Turkey. Members should
                                         regularly raise concerns with the State Department and directly with the Turkish govern-
                                         ment, through actions such as dear colleague letters, floor statements, resolutions, and so
                                         on.
                                               Member-level and staff delegations to Turkey must include prep meetings with
                                         human rights organizations prior to their visit, and also once on the ground in Turkey.
                                         Finally, members should consider providing additional funding for grassroots organiza-
                                         tions in Turkey, and continue funding critical programs, like the lifeline, embattled, CSO
                                         assistance fund. These measures are critical to ensure that Turkish civil society can sur-
                                         vive Turkey’s ongoing human rights crisis.
                                               Thank you very much. I look forward to your questions and comments.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     9




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00013   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Thank you so much, Deniz. This has been both eye-opening and dis-
                                         turbing. I think the theme from both of your testimonies is that there are challenges—
                                         there are serious challenges—but also there are some opportunities. I think that is the
                                         goal of the briefing today is to identify those opportunities. My first question—and, again,
                                         I would like to—I would like to ask if Co-Chairman Cohen, if you might have some ques-
                                         tions for our witnesses and also open this up to other people. Again, feel free to use the
                                         chat box function and ask a question. But, Co-Chairman, did you have any questions just
                                         to followup on these two testimonies?
                                              Co-chair COHEN: Thank you. I appreciate it, and I appreciate the—I failed to men-
                                         tion, which I guess I consider it a given, but it is not a given, how Turkey has been our
                                         friend in so many areas. That iis one of the reason I was proud to be, and have been
                                         proud to be a Co-chair of the Turkey Caucus. They have worked with us. They have been
                                         friendly with Israel on and off, but more on. I think there is a visit coming up soon where
                                         they are reestablishing their previous relations. They have been a strong member of
                                         NATO and a member of the European Union. They—I have had soldiers, older people,
                                         who have told me how they fought with them in the Korean War, and how much they
                                         respected that. That memory still exists in current folks, and it has been passed on to
                                         me.
                                              I would—I am concerned a little bit about the Turkish attitude toward the Kurds.
                                         The PKK is a terrorist organization, and they were doing a lot of terror when I was there.
                                         I think it was 2008 or 2007. There was a lot of activities of bombings in Turkey, in
                                         Istanbul. All the Kurds are not terrorists. Indeed, the Kurdish people in northern Iraq
                                         have a good reputation and had a good reputation during the Iraqi War. Certainly the
                                         Kurds in Syria have worked with us, the United States, against ISIS and have been our
                                         friends. I would like your thoughts, either one of you, on how Turkey is treating Kurds
                                         in general. I know you mentioned the arrest of the two members of the parliament, but
                                         in general are Kurds being discriminated against in Turkey and how do they distinguish
                                         between the Kurds in Iraq and the Kurds in Syria, and their concerns about their being
                                         terrorist organizations as well?
                                              Mr. YUKSEL: I am happy to take this question. Thank you for this very relevant ques-
                                         tion, Chairman Cohen. You are absolutely right, the Turkish government’s crackdown on
                                         human rights in general affects marginalized and minority communities more acutely, and
                                         the Kurds in particular, who have, of course, been repressed by successive Turkish
                                         governments for decades. I think one issue that is particularly timely, you know, leading
                                         into an election year—and I sort of refer to it in my testimony a little bit as well—is the
                                         repression of Kurdish communities’ political rights, right? The big case right now that we
                                         have to be watching is the closure case facing the HDP, the pro-Kurdish party which rep-
                                         resents the interests and the votes of millions and millions of people.
                                              At the root of this case in 2016 was the Turkish legislature’s vote to remove the par-
                                         liamentary immunities of dozens of HDP MPs. That opened the way for countless inves-
                                         tigations and prosecutions and, of course, the detention of HDP leaders. These cases are
                                         currently at the basis of the government’s efforts to shut down the party itself, and of
                                         course, it is part of the government’s larger crackdown on Kurdish political expression,
                                         Kurdish civil society, and so on. I wanted to raise this because there is a recent develop-
                                         ment that pertains to this case. And that is the ruling, I think earlier this month by the
                                         European Court of Human Rights, which said that the removal of the HDP MPs’ immu-
                                         nity back in 2016, which formed the basis for all of these prosecutions, was actually a
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 10




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00014   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         violation of these parliamentarians’ human rights and a violation of their freedom of
                                         expression.
                                               This case is really important as a development while we are still going through this
                                         closure case against the HDP because now it brings into question whether all the cases
                                         that were brought against the individuals which the government is using in its argument
                                         to shut down the organization itself, it brings into question whether those are legitimate,
                                         whether those were done lawfully, and in fair trial processes. So with these in mind, it
                                         is really clear that the closure case is a very problematic one. We are headed into an elec-
                                         tion year. Also because there has not been a permanent resolution, as you referred to in
                                         your comments. To the conflict between the Turkish State and the PKK. As the represent-
                                         ative of million and millions of people, the HDP has a critical role to play, along with the
                                         Turkish State, in ensuring an enduring resolution to this conflict. So it is a major step
                                         backward on both of those fronts. Thank you for raising that.
                                               Co-chair COHEN: I appreciate your response. I understand that, and I agree it is a
                                         serious issue. Are there not quite a few members of the party that represents Kurdish
                                         people, I guess it is the HDP, in the parliament? How are they responding to this? Also
                                         back to the issue about how—you know, Turkey, when I bring this issue up with them—
                                         and I appreciate your remarks about what Congress can do. I know I have, and I believe
                                         my Co-chairs have joined me, particularly Congressman Connolly, we have expressed our
                                         regret to the Turkish government on many occasions for human rights abuses—many,
                                         many occasions. They always respond when you ask them about Kurds in Iraq or in Syria,
                                         that they are just kind of cousins or something. They are all part of the same anti-Turkish
                                         terrorist-type organization. Have you noticed any distinction between how they treat the
                                         Kurds, or their attitude toward the Kurds in Iraq and Syria? Or do they feel they are
                                         supporting the PKK?
                                               Mr. YUKSEL: Thank you for that question. I think that description at least of the
                                         Turkish government’s view of Kurdish communities, you know, in Turkey and abroad, I
                                         think that is an accurate one. I think their actions do reflect this very, very problematic
                                         idea of Kurds—and there is millions and millions of Kurds around the world, right? It
                                         is impossible for all of them to be involved in one organization or another. It is just a
                                         very inhumane way of looking at a community, and a very discriminatory and bigoted way
                                         to be associating all parts of a community with one particular organization, which is of
                                         course not the case, and could not be the case.
                                               I think we are seeing that not just in the political repression domestically of the
                                         Kurds, which I talked about a little bit, but also in the Turkish government’s foreign oper-
                                         ations, particularly, as you mentioned, in Syria and in northern Iraq as well. I mean, in
                                         Syria we saw Turkish forces and Turkish-backed groups, including some of which are
                                         reported to be directly armed by Turkey, engaging in serious human rights violations,
                                         some of which amount to war crimes, including enforced disappearances, unlawful
                                         killings, indiscriminate attacks on, you know, schools and civilian areas, which have
                                         resulted in, you know, a great number of civilian deaths and casualties as well.
                                               I think there has not really been an effort—you know, there has been several years
                                         since these operations have first started, back in 2016, and there has not really been a
                                         serious effort to hold the Turkish State and the groups it has supported and worked with
                                         accountable for these human rights abuses. We have no guarantee that Turkey is not
                                         going to launch another operation which is going to involve, you know, another set of
                                         serious crimes against civilians there. So thank you for raising that.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 11




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00015   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                              Co-chair COHEN: Now, would you like to add anything, sir?
                                              Mr. CAGAPTAY: Thank you, Congressman. I agree with everything that Deniz said.
                                         I think it is an important human rights issue in Turkey, obviously. I think that the party
                                         elected to the parliament should be treated like all other parties elected to parliament.
                                         I will stand with that.
                                              Co-chair COHEN: Thank you. The only other thing I would like to mention is Hussein
                                         Ibish had a really nice piece today about UAE and Turkey, and how they are getting kind
                                         of back together. I think there was a visit on Valentine’s Day, how appropriate. They seem
                                         to be getting together, and it shows Erdogan is seeing the realities because of economic
                                         problems in Turkey and reuniting or establishing new relationships. That is a bad reason,
                                         but good result. I yield back.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Thank you, Congressman—Co-Chairman Cohen, thank you so much
                                         for your comments. Also we would all like to acknowledge your leadership on this issue.
                                         You have been a proponent of a stronger engagement with Turkey, a principled engage-
                                         ment with Turkey. We appreciate everything you have done. I think you and Congress-
                                         man Connolly’s efforts never go unnoticed. Thank you so much. To all of us who watch
                                         Turkey, you are one of those leaders who have done much and more to make sure Turkey,
                                         again, lives up to its potential.
                                              One question that we got here, and maybe, Soner, I do not know if you would like
                                         to take that. The question is: Would you like—would you say there is a correlation—and,
                                         Deniz, please feel free to jump in as well—would you say there is a correlation between
                                         Turkey’s movement away from secularism and an increase in intolerance toward religious
                                         minorities? I think it is a really good question. You have pointed out in your opening
                                         remarks that Turkey, you know, there is an effort to move away from secularism. What
                                         kind of an impact does it have on Turkish minorities—on minorities in Turkey?
                                              Mr. CAGAPTAY: Absolutely. Let me step in. I am sure Deniz can add a lot more. No,
                                         I think that actually giving him credit and being fair, under President Erdogan, back
                                         when he was prime minister during his first decade in power, Turkey actually saw an
                                         era of increased rights and liberties for non-Muslim communities. These are very small
                                         communities in the context of Turkish demographics. Turkey’s population is 84 million
                                         people and non-Muslim communities add up to just about, you know, 0.1 percent of the
                                         total population at this stage. You know, I think a democracy is a real one not when it
                                         protects large groups, but when it protects small and vulnerable groups. In this regard,
                                         there was a lot of progress, improved liberties for non-Muslim communities in the first
                                         decade of Erdogan’s rule.
                                              Now we have seen perhaps a reversal of that. Rising anti-Semitism I think is a huge
                                         concern in Turkey, and hate speech that is oftentimes endorsed by people as high up—
                                         government ministers targeting these communities, also a very serious concern. So I
                                         would say maybe legally rights and liberties have been expanded, but also we have seen
                                         a really dramatic rise in hate speech targeting mostly Jews, but also Armenians and
                                         Christians at the same time. Very problematic trends. I think, as I said earlier, you know,
                                         the strength of a democracy is not when it protects a group that is a third of the popu-
                                         lation. It is when it protects a group that is one thousandth of the population. I think
                                         in this regard there is a lot the Turkish government can do.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Excellent. Thank you so much. Another question that we have, and
                                         I think this sort of gets to the core of what we are trying to discuss here, is to what extent
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 12




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00016   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         the cooperation between Turkey and the United States and EU on the Ukraine crisis,
                                         amid the Ukraine crisis, would affect their stance on human rights issues in Turkey. I
                                         think we have talked about it a little bit, but I think that is always a concern. If we
                                         increase that, you know, mil-to-mil cooperation, will—is the United States and the EU—
                                         are we going to be more silent on human rights issues that are happening in Turkey?
                                         Maybe both of you—Soner and Deniz—maybe you could both sort of try that? Yes.
                                              Mr. CAGAPTAY: Sure, let me go first—or, Deniz, unless you want to jump in?
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Soner, please.
                                              Mr. CAGAPTAY: All right. I will go first then. Thank you. Yes, I think that the
                                         administration’s policy regarding Turkey is to create three silos, since President Biden
                                         took office. The first silo include areas of disagreement, that is two topics under it. Of
                                         course, continued U.S. cooperation with Kurdish People’s Protection Forces, YPG in Syria.
                                         Although the YPG helps U.S. fight ISIS, or contain it, rather, at this stage, there is a
                                         problem. The YPG’s an offshoot of PKK, Kurdistan Worker’s Party, that is a terror-des-
                                         ignated entity. There is no way Turkish government or Turkish public will embrace that
                                         policy, and that is a serious issue of discord.
                                              The other side of it, of course, is Turkey’s purchase of Russian-made S–400 missile
                                         defense system, for which Turkey has been sanctioned. It is impossible for U.S. Govern-
                                         ment to embrace that policy. The first silo—or, area of discord includes these two items.
                                         The Biden administration, in my view, has decided to kind of compartmentalize and say:
                                         Let us put these aside, let us not focus on these areas of disagreement. They are looking
                                         actually for areas of engagement—Afghanistan, Ukraine.
                                              Ukraine is a big one. It seems to be NATO’s biggest test since the collapse of the
                                         Soviet Union, perhaps since the war in Bosnia, in terms of its area of operation being
                                         Europe, and the conflict brewing, of course. I think Turkey, if Turkey helped the United
                                         States, even if this is behind closed doors and militarily, as I am predicting, because Mr.
                                         Erdogan does not want to anger President Putin in Moscow, that will be—create a positive
                                         sentiment toward Turkey. The question is, you know, can Turkey get away with broader
                                         human rights abuses and more autocratic measures at home?
                                              The third silo that the Biden administration has created in regards to its policy on
                                         Turkey is that it also wants to have a human rights compartment where it engages Tur-
                                         key on this area. I will refer to Deniz on this, Ms. Yuksel, to see if the Biden administra-
                                         tion has been forthcoming of keeping its promise of engaging Turkey on this—in this area.
                                         As the question highlights I think, yes, there is a potential here that if Turkish assistance
                                         to the U.S. regarding Ukraine is significant, as invisible as it might be to the public eye,
                                         of course that that would allow—not so much, I think, in the eyes of the U.S. public, not
                                         necessarily—but in the eyes of many European governments, who already have a prag-
                                         matic relationship with Turkey, to sort of turn their head the other way.
                                              Europe and Turkey have a more intimate relationship than do United States and
                                         Turkey, because Turkey’s part of Europe. It sits on the edge of the European continent
                                         as well. Crisis in Turkey has the potential to export itself to Europe faster, and quicker,
                                         and easier than, of course, would be the case into the United States. Refugee crisis is one
                                         that recently got transported from Turkey to Europe. I think that European countries,
                                         especially Germany, have a more pragmatic view of ties with Turkey. They engage Tur-
                                         key’s government. They raise their human rights concerns on the side.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 13




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00017   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                               Overall, I think that Turkey’s autocratic slide under President Erdogan has become
                                         so severe, you know, those of you who follow me on Twitter may know that I am a map
                                         nerd. I just saw the map this morning looking at how countries are colored in terms of
                                         their democracies. Turkey is the only country other than Belarus and Russia on the con-
                                         tinent that is now considered hybrid and not democratic, and not even a flawed one. It
                                         is hard for me at this stage to see what kind of a hall pass Turkish government would
                                         get, even if it helped everyone else in Ukraine, because the democratic slide under Mr.
                                         Erdogan is so severe.
                                               I think maybe some cosmetic statements here and there, but broadly speaking, given
                                         how unfair the democratic playing field is, and given the increased nature of autocratic
                                         crackdown inside Turkey in the runup to elections that I am predicting, it will be impos-
                                         sible, I think, for anyone to put lipstick on the pig and say, this is fine. We can deal with
                                         it. I hope that expression translates well in Turkish. I just made it up. [Laughter.]
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: It was excellent.
                                               Mr. CAGAPTAY: Thank you.
                                               Mr. YUKSEL: Thank you.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Deniz, please.
                                               Mr. YUKSEL: I think, Dr. Cagaptay, you are the expert when it comes to foreign policy
                                         and defense issues. I think sometimes we do tend to over-compartmentalize human rights,
                                         and see it as something that, you know, does not have any links to the issues that we
                                         are talking about when it comes to security and so on. I think we should really avoid
                                         doing that, and that is sort of, like, a simplistic way of viewing things. I would—for
                                         example, in this case, in the case in Ukraine, there is talk of Turkey supplying drones
                                         to the Ukraine. I would really like to caution people on this call, given credible media
                                         reports during the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, that Azeri forces used Turkish drones to
                                         carry out disproportionate and indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas.
                                               There is a history of Turkey supplying drones, perhaps in good faith, to its partners,
                                         to other countries, and then not really overseeing how these drones are being used. It is
                                         also raised the question of whether U.S. parts are being used in these Turkish drones,
                                         and therefore implicated in unlawful killings and attacks on civilian areas. I mean, we
                                         have laws here in the U.S., the Leahy laws and the Foreign Assistance Act, which obli-
                                         gates us to be considering these human rights aspects. Even when we are talking about
                                         what seems to be a purely defense and security issue, these human rights obligations still
                                         exist.
                                               Given this history, I think implications of Turkish support or how Turkey can be
                                         positioned to, you know, benefit the interests of the United States, has to be considered
                                         alongside other factors given, you know, this administration’s commitments to human
                                         rights, and also every, you know, country who is, you know, signed these treaties has
                                         commitments to human rights and has to consider them in every context. Thank you.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Thank you so much, Deniz.
                                               Let us go to the next question. I think this is, again, important. I think we have
                                         alluded a little bit to the elections—upcoming elections in Turkey. In addition to the more
                                         long-standing problems noted in the presentation, are there any that require additional
                                         attention, given the upcoming elections this year? Would you expect further crackdowns
                                         on media, for example?
                                               Deniz, if you would like to take that. Soner, please feel free to jump in.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 14




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00018   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                               Mr. YUKSEL: Absolutely. I think the No. 1, you know, issue that I would like to high-
                                         light with relation to the elections is the closure case against the HDP. I know I have
                                         already extensively talked about that, so I guess we can also talk about some other things
                                         that, you know, we would not be surprised to see leading into an election year. Even at
                                         this point, you know, journalistic freedoms and highly, highly limited in Turkey.
                                               You know, dozens of media workers are persecuted for performing the most basic and
                                         most foundational acts of their professions, right? Cartoonists have been arrested for
                                         drawing cartoons, and reporters have been arrested for interviewing controversial guests.
                                         This is all, you know, an effort to criminalize journalism itself. It becomes even more
                                         important leading into an election year, when the government has even more incentive
                                         to crack down on criticism and to crack down on dissent.
                                               We are seeing signs of that already. We have heard from Erdogan’s communications
                                         director a few months ago, signaled that there might be additional legislation coming to
                                         further regulate media organizations in Turkey. We also have seen recently the Turkish
                                         media watchdog has started to implement an existing law regarding the extra, you know,
                                         regulations place upon foreign media organizations. Voice of America, in fact, has been
                                         affected by this. They have put out a statement saying that no matter what they are going
                                         to try to do their best to provide accurate and timely information to the people of Turkey.
                                               Accurate and timely information is especially important in a time of election, espe-
                                         cially when you have folks that are protesting the economic situation, and so on. Accurate
                                         information is really, really important for everybody’s well-being and safety and, of course,
                                         for the integrity of the elections themselves. I would be really, really closely watching this
                                         issue. Again, would not be surprised to see the crackdown deepening in the next year or
                                         so.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Thank you, Deniz.
                                               Soner, I wonder if you have any thoughts on this? Specifically, I think, it would be—
                                         you would mentioned that the elections are going to be free, but they are not going to
                                         be fair. I think this is a very, very, very good point. If you could sort of talk a little bit
                                         about why they would not be fair.
                                               Mr. CAGAPTAY: Thank you, again. I will just follow what Deniz left. Elections have
                                         not been fair for a while. They were free and fair, and Mr. Erdogan deserves credit for
                                         winning free and fair elections for almost 15 years—strong popular support, basically
                                         driven by the phenomenal economic growth that he delivered. That is why he is in
                                         trouble, because since the economy entered into recession now he needs to win elections—
                                         continues to win elections, as he sees it, but not free any—not fair anymore, of course,
                                         I think. Ninety percent of conventional media is controlled by businesses that are loyal
                                         to him, some are directly linked to him. He appoints majority of judges to the high courts
                                         without a confirmation process. He controls electoral boards. The race is definitely not
                                         fair.
                                               It remains free, and in my view, it will be free. That is because Turkey is democrat-
                                         ically resilient. What it means is that Turkey has been having free and fair elections
                                         longer than has been Spain. The country’s first free and fair elections were held in 1950.
                                         That means four generation of Turkish citizens have been voting in elections. People know
                                         how to vote, and they love to vote. Turnout in Turkey is 85 percent. Impressive compared
                                         to the turnout rates we get here in the U.S. Not only that, but people protect their vote.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 15




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00019   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                              Mr. Erdogan lost a first round Istanbul election in March 2019, very narrow margin.
                                         He thought that because he controls institutions—media, electoral boards—he could
                                         repeat the elections and win them. He claimed there was fraud. There was an insignifi-
                                         cant margin of 13,000 votes in a city of 15 million people. He thought that he could make
                                         up for that margin easily in the repeat round that took place in June same year. Guess
                                         what? He lost that second round by nearly a 1 million vote margin—800,000, to be precise.
                                              That is democratic resilience for you, right? That is for citizens who voted for him
                                         saying, that is not fair. You lost. You know, you get one chance. You lose, you step down.
                                         Opposition organized a massive campaign, protect the vote, 100,000 volunteers, who went
                                         with their smartphones, documented the tally. Turkish law allows any citizen to observe
                                         the vote count, and Turks love to do that. On top of it, these volunteers slept on top of
                                         the ballot boxes, literally, to prevent any rigging. I think that the vote will be unfair, but
                                         it will be free, and that is a big challenge for Mr. Erdogan.
                                              Just also answering the question a little bit deeper, I do expect, as Ms. Yuksel said,
                                         further demonization of the opposition. There is a little bit of domestic baseball, if I can
                                         explain. The opposition bloc has informal and formal partners, but it has one large party,
                                         a secular, leftist Republican People’s Party, CHP, main opposition. It has—the bloc has
                                         two wings. Formally, the Turkish nationalist Iyi Party—I-Y-I—of Meral Aksener, and
                                         informally HDP, pro-Kurdish liberalized People’s Democratic Party, are in the bloc. HDP’s
                                         going to support it from outside for a variety of things to do with the dynamics of the
                                         opposition, but they are part of the same bloc.
                                              I think what Mr. Erdogan will do is he will demonize the HDP in order to force—
                                         as the HDP being a pro-Kurdish force with a large Kurdish nationalist constituency, he
                                         is going to demonize the HDP further so as to push Turkish nationalist Iyi Party to
                                         abandon the opposition bloc. He knows that—Mr. Erdogan knows that he will lose the
                                         race—he will lose the elections in a two-way race. That is his own doing, because the
                                         switch to the Presidential system in 2018 has created this two-way race, because it has,
                                         you know, eliminated the multiparty parliamentary democratic race. Now Mr. Erdogan
                                         wants to create a three-way race. For that, he is demonizing the Kurdish nationalist
                                         opposition in order to force the Turkish nationalist party in the bloc to abandon the
                                         opposition.
                                              To put it very simply, Mr. Erdogan will win in a three-way race. He will lose in a
                                         two-way race. I think that is why we are going to see, unfortunately, more demonization
                                         of the opposition. There will be other steps. For instance, crackdown on social media. With
                                         Mr. Erdogan having taken control over 90 percent of conventional media—and, again,
                                         Turkey has been a democracy and they have had free press for almost four generations
                                         now. You know, people, if they see government dictating headlines to 90 percent of papers
                                         and primetime, you know, networks, they will not read the news anymore.
                                              Citizens and voters and news consumers are migrating in droves to social media plat-
                                         forms, where you have independent journalists who have millions of followers who do
                                         video, who do podcasts, who do tweets. So I think you will see a bigger crackdown on
                                         these platforms that provide for new avenues of journalism, free, of course, areas of jour-
                                         nalism. I would say that is another area to watch. Maybe if you want to help Turkish
                                         elections be free, you know, allow for these platforms to remain free. That is important.
                                              It is ultimately up to Turkey’s citizens to decide who they like and who they want
                                         to see in power. That vote, though it may not be fair, I think will be free. It will be impor-
                                         tant. Turkish elections matter. Right now they are scheduled for June 2023. I think those
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 16




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00020   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         are going to be the most historic elections in the history of the Turkish Republic, since
                                         the first free and fair elections in 1950.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: That is a great point. It is a great overview. Thank you so much, and
                                         it is a perfect segue to our next question, which is—[audio break]—so CHP chairman,
                                         opposition leader, came out—[audio break]—that elections could take place as soon as
                                         this fall, almost a year ahead of the scheduled date in summer 2023. Do you think this
                                         is likely?
                                               Soner, maybe you will take it. Deniz, please feel free to jump in as well.
                                               Mr. CAGAPTAY: Sorry, Bakhti, you got cutoff for a second. Was this about whether
                                         early elections are likely?
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Yes. Yes. I am sorry—yes. I do apologize. Yes.
                                               Mr. CAGAPTAY: So—
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Do you think snap election—early election is likely? Yes.
                                               Mr. CAGAPTAY: I think—I mean, technically, yes. Actually, it is in the interests Mr.
                                         Erdogan. The new constitution he put in place, or amendments, rather, that created the
                                         executive style Presidential system in 2018 give him two additional—two terms. There are
                                         still term limits, but the law also says that if the parliament is dissolved before the end
                                         of his one term, that gives Mr. Erdogan a third term. It is in his interest to have early
                                         elections, either this term or, if he wins, next term, in order to add one more term to his
                                         tenure. He might do it this time, but probably not because if elections were held today,
                                         he would not win them. If elections were held in 6 months, I think he still would not win
                                         them—meaning, getting 50 percent.
                                               That is a lot to do with the economic problems in the country. After phenomenal
                                         growth, 15 years of prosperity, Turkish citizens are coming down hard, economically
                                         speaking. I think Mr. Erdogan’s interest is to have growth—phenomenal, double-digits, if
                                         he ca—for at least a year so citizens will forget the hardships of the economic crisis, and
                                         pandemic-related shrinking as well. These are independent factors, but they have been
                                         compounded in Turkey. You had indigenous economic problems, and COVID-related eco-
                                         nomic problems. They are both now adding up to each other. I think Mr. Erdogan is more
                                         interested in having at least a year of strong growth, waiting until June 2023, before he
                                         will do elections, because if he did elections after a few months of growth it will not be
                                         enough for citizens to forget the hardship they went through for at least 4 years.
                                               He has got really a multitude of problems here, and that has to do with his own suc-
                                         cess, right? The economy was so good, people were so prosperous, that they are finding
                                         it hard now to adjust to the new reality of skyrocketing inflation. Thirty percent this year,
                                         high unemployment, double digits already. That is unusual because citizens lived so well
                                         for so long under Mr. Erdogan. Perhaps he is a victim—he is a victim of his own economic
                                         success. Citizens are finding it very hard to embrace economic downturn, inflation, and
                                         unemployment. I think that this stage my vote will be for elections on time.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Excellent. Deniz, anything you would like to add to this?
                                               Mr. YUKSEL: No. I think this is all really great analysis. I will just say that one per-
                                         son knows the answer and he is not on this panel today, unfortunately. [Laughter.] but—
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Next time we will have to make sure to invite him,, but sorry, yes.
                                         Yes. Thank you. Thank you. To be clear, we did invite Turkish government representa-
                                         tives, and they mulled it over, and we appreciate their consideration. For various reasons,
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 17




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00021   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         they could not join us this morning. Again, this is—again, this is in the spirit of coopera-
                                         tion and coordination. This briefing—that is the spirit of this briefing.
                                              Well, one more question. I know we went over time, but if you guys can stay feel
                                         free to, and then maybe we could just—yes, maybe we could try to wrap it up maybe in
                                         the next 10 minutes. So—and this one is very complementary to you, Dr. Cagaptay. How
                                         do you—Dr. Soner—how do you conceive of the foreign policy of Turkey on East Asia,
                                         especially China and South Asia regions? I love your work on ‘‘New Sultan: Erdogan and
                                         the Price of Modern Turkey.’’ Great analysis with various perspectives covered. There you
                                         go.
                                              Mr. CAGAPTAY: Well, thank you, Bakhti. Please call me Soner. China is an important
                                         piece of the puzzle. I think that Mr. Erdogan’s reelection strategy, of course, as we have
                                         debated it, depends on returning strong economic growth. For which, he wants to get
                                         along with the U.S. and Europe. Turkey being part of Europe economically, he wants to
                                         increase investment. The major source of FDI coming to Turkey is still European, notwith-
                                         standing Mr. Erdogan’s efforts to change Turkey’s identity. Economically, this is a Euro-
                                         pean country. He wants to get along well with President Biden, to create a narrative of
                                         good ties with the U.S. so that markets will invest in Turkey again.
                                              He also, Mr. Erdogan also has to get along with Russia. President Putin has many
                                         levers. Russians were No. 1 among the arrivals to Turkey before the pandemic. Turkey
                                         has a very large tourism industry. In fact, it is among the—always among the top 10,
                                         sometimes top five most visited countries in the world. If anybody on this call has not
                                         visited Turkey, you guys should go and visit. There’s great food, of course, that helps. The
                                         bottom line is the Russians are No. 1 among—were among number-one arrivals to Turkey.
                                         Ten million Russians visited Turkey before the pandemic. Maybe this summer 15 million
                                         will come and visit. That is over $10 billion added to Turkey’s economy. That is how Tur-
                                         key will bounce back from economic recession.
                                              Trade is an important part of the piece with Russia also. I think one of the reason
                                         why Turkish support to the U.S. regarding Ukraine w ill not be public is because Turkish
                                         President Erdogan does not want to cross Vladimir Putin. He does not want to trigger
                                         retaliatory measures by Russia in case of overt Turkish assistance to Ukraine. These
                                         measures by Russia could include sanctions. Putin could tell Russian tourists, do not go
                                         to Turkey. Go to Egypt. There is zero cost to him. He could ban Turkish exports. Usually
                                         he does that when he is angry at Turkey for political reasons. He has health excuses, or
                                         alibi, rather. So—and if he did that, you know, trade sanctions and tourism boycott could
                                         shave off a few percent points from Turkey’s growth, and with that, of course, undermine
                                         President Erdogan’s reelection prospects.
                                              China comes in similarly. I think that President Erdogan has relied on China for soft
                                         loans, especially to build megaprojects, with the drawing off of FDI coming to Turkey, now
                                         that many people consider Turkey too unstable and risky to invest. President Erdogan’s
                                         economic growth model is now driven by megaprojects. These are giant reconstruction
                                         projects, mostly bridges, tunnels, high-speed rail lines, metro lines. The Chinese have
                                         played a big role in funding these. The Chinese central bank has also established a swap
                                         line to Turkish central bank to help it sustain currency crisis. I think President Erdogan
                                         wants to not anger Beijing as well.
                                              That is a tall order. He has to get along well with Washington, the EU, Moscow, and
                                         Beijing all at the same time, while resetting ties with Israel and rich Gulf neighbors. He
                                         is also hoping, I think, for investment from the Gulf to restore economic growth. I think
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 18




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00022   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                         Chinese policymakers are quite smart. They know that President Erdogan wants to court
                                         them, but they also know that Turkey is among the hub—one of the—is actually, I would
                                         say, the biggest hub of the Uyghur diaspora globally. There is a Uyghur diaspora here
                                         in Northern Virginia, in Germany. These are more recent diaspora hubs. Turkey has been
                                         a hub since 1949, since the Chinese Communist Party took physical control of Xinjiang,
                                         at the time called East Turkestan. Everybody in Beijing and their uncles know the fact
                                         that Uyghur leadership is in Turkey.
                                              I think that the Chinese are not going to be super crazy about bailing Turkey out,
                                         but at the moment, President Erdogan wants to maintain moderately good ties with
                                         China. Turkey has been absent from any condemnation of Chinese policy targeted at
                                         Uyghurs and their persecution of the Uyghur community. I think that has a lot to do with
                                         President Erdogan’s own reelection prospects. I would say, as Deniz said, only one person
                                         knows when elections will be held, if they are early or not, and I would say the other
                                         takeaway of this conversation, if you want to kind of have a talking point writing to your
                                         bosses or to media or to anybody else, or summarizing it just for yourself, Turkish politics
                                         is all about Erdogan now. It is all about Erdogan winning the next elections. He will do
                                         whatever it takes to get to that goal. That also includes maintaining moderately good ties
                                         with China.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Excellent. Thank you so much. I have one more question. I think this
                                         is a fascinating question and I would appreciate both of your perspectives: How does
                                         Turkish society view or respond to the Turkish government’s increasing crackdown on
                                         individuals for insulting the president or insulting religious values, blasphemy, especially
                                         in connection with their social media posts? Would you say it has had an overall chilling
                                         effect, or how does the society in Turkey respond to that?
                                              Maybe, Deniz, you would like to take it. Soner, I would appreciate your thoughts on
                                         it as well.
                                              Mr. YUKSEL: The simple answer to that is yes, it has had a significant chilling effect.
                                         I mean, I think those of us who are from Turkey or have friends in Turkey, we know this
                                         very intimately. I mean, our friends and families, you know, do not feel as comfortable
                                         tweeting their opinions and sharing their opinions publicly when it comes to the govern-
                                         ment’s policies. And we’re seeing a really, really unfortunate intensification of the way
                                         that the government uses these defamation laws. Particularly the criminal—parts of the
                                         criminal code in Turkey which establish the definition of criminal defamation, criminal
                                         defamation against a public official, against the head of State, and criminal blasphemy
                                         are very, very vaguely defined and, you know, not necessarily in line with international
                                         human rights law and standards.
                                              Traditionally, these have been, for the most part, abused in order to silence media
                                         and journalists. We are still seeing examples of that, right? Some of you might have heard
                                         of the journalist Sedef Kabash, who is now facing, I think, up to 11 years in prison for
                                         a tweet supposedly, you know, making a reference to the president—although without
                                         mentioning his name. That continues to be the case, but increasingly also these laws are
                                         being used against everyday people, just a bunch of followers tweeting out to their friends.
                                         I think we are likely to see more of that headed into elections.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Soner, your thoughts on this?
                                              Mr. CAGAPTAY: I will just say I agree with Deniz, Ms. Yuksel, in the sake of keeping
                                         our time.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 19




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00023   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Thank you so much. This has been an incredible conversation and I
                                         would like to thank our—everyone who is submitted their questions. [Audio break]—con-
                                         tinue this, the Helsinki Commission. Turkey is an important country, is an important
                                         regional power and a global power. It is important for everyone, for all of us, but espe-
                                         cially for people who live in Turkey, Turkish citizens, I mean, and it is—it is our concern
                                         as part of—Helsinki Commission, obviously, works very closely as part of that Organiza-
                                         tion for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Turkey being as, as I mentioned before, a
                                         founding member, I think it is important for us to see that Turkey is again living up to
                                         commitments it has taken on itself.
                                              This has been a great conversation. So, Chairman Cohen, would you have any closing
                                         words? Any closing remarks?
                                              Co-chair COHEN: I just appreciate our witnesses and the hearing. I think it is impor-
                                         tant. The Turkey-American relationship has been strong, it needs to continue to be strong,
                                         but we do not need to overlook the human rights abuses in Turkey. We need to remain
                                         vigilant, and we shall.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Excellent. I mean, I think I could not have summed this up better.
                                         It is important, but we will stay vigilant. Thank you so much, again, for your leadership
                                         on this issue.
                                              Co-chair COHEN: Thank you.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Thank you so much to our witnesses. Incredibly knowledgeable. Ou—
                                         yes, everybody in the comments, in the chat box, you will see that they are appreciating
                                         your in-depth research. We are going to continue this conversation. Again, for a lot of rea-
                                         sons this is incredibly important, and as the election is coming up, I think we are going
                                         to be—we are probably going to have a hearing on Turkey, and make sure, again, that
                                         it is—you know, the election standards are held, and we will continue this conversation.
                                         Thank you so much, Soner, Deniz. This was wonderful. Please—if you have any—I know
                                         we are short on time, but anything you would like to add to close us off, I would appre-
                                         ciate that.
                                              Mr. CAGAPTAY: Thanks so much, Bakhti. I also want to thank Co-Chair Congressman
                                         Cohen for hosting us. Very generous with his time. Members on the staff of the Commis-
                                         sion, of course. It was a great pleasure to be on the same panel with my colleague, Deniz
                                         Yuksel.
                                              Mr. YUKSEL: Likewise. I mean, repeat all of those sentiments. Really, really grateful
                                         to the Commission staff and, of course, Chairman Cohen. Thank you, everyone, for being
                                         here, and for your excellent, excellent question.
                                              Mr. CAGAPTAY: Likewise. Great questions, everyone, and thanks for being engaged in
                                         Turkey, a very important country. I appreciate everyone coming in today.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Thank you, once again, to everyone for participating, and thank you
                                         to our witnesses. With that, we are going to close this, and have a wonderful rest of the
                                         day. Bye-bye, everyone.
                                              Mr. CAGAPTAY: Thanks so much.
                                              [Whereupon, at 12:16 p.m., the briefing ended.]


                                                                                                                     Æ
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                 20




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   12:44 Nov 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00024   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 6011   C:\USERS\KKEY\ONEDRIVE - US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES\DOCUMENTS\117TH\
