                                          117thCONGRESS                                                                                         Printed for the use of the
                                          2d Session                                                                    Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe




                                                     Russia’s Infrastructure Terrorists




                                                                                                     DECEMBER 8, 2022



                                                                                       Briefing of the
                                                                      Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe

                                                                                                          Washington: 2023
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                                                                             CSCESeal.EPS




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00001   Fmt 3191   Sfmt 3191   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                                                      Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
                                                                               234 Ford House Office Building
                                                                                    Washington, DC 20515
                                                                                        202–225–1901
                                                                                    csce@mail.house.gov
                                                                                     http://www.csce.gov
                                                                                       @HelsinkiComm




                                                                                       Legislative Branch Commissioners

                                                     SENATE                                                                            HOUSE
                                         BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, MARYLAND                                                       STEVE COHEN, TENNESSEE Co-Chairman
                                           Chairman                                                                         ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, ALABAMA
                                         RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, CONNECTICUT                                                    EMANUEL CLEAVER II, MISSOURI
                                         JOHN BOOZMAN, ARKANSAS                                                             BRIAN FITZPATRICK, PENNSYLVANIA
                                         TIM SCOTT, SOUTH CAROLINA                                                          RUBEN GALLEGO, ARIZONA
                                         JEANNE SHAHEEN, NEW HAMPSHIRE                                                      RICHARD HUDSON, NORTH CAROLINA
                                         TINA SMITH, MINNESOTA                                                              GWEN MOORE, WISCONSIN
                                         THOM TILLIS, NORTH CAROLINA                                                        MARC VEASEY, TEXAS
                                         SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, RHODE ISLAND                                                   JOE WILSON, SOUTH CAROLINA
                                         ROGER F. WICKER, MISSISSIPPI

                                                                                        Executive Branch Commissioners

                                                                                      DEPARTMENT OF STATE, to be appointed
                                                                                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, to be appointed
                                                                                    DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, to be appointed




                                                                                                                     [II]
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                      (2)




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00002   Fmt 3193      Sfmt 3193   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                             ABOUT THE ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE

                                              The Helsinki process, formally titled the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
                                         Europe, traces its origin to the signing of the Helsinki Final Act in Finland on August
                                         1, 1975, by the leaders of 33 European countries, the United States and Canada. As of
                                         January 1, 1995, the Helsinki process was renamed the Organization for Security and
                                         Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
                                              The membership of the OSCE has expanded to 57 participating States, reflecting the
                                         breakup of the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.
                                              The OSCE Secretariat is in Vienna, Austria, where weekly meetings of the partici-
                                         pating States’ permanent representatives are held. In addition, specialized seminars and
                                         meetings are convened in various locations. Periodic consultations are held among Senior
                                         Officials, Ministers and Heads of State or Government.
                                              Although the OSCE continues to engage in standard setting in the fields of military
                                         security, economic and environmental cooperation, and human rights and humanitarian
                                         concerns, the Organization is primarily focused on initiatives designed to prevent, manage
                                         and resolve conflict within and among the participating States. The Organization deploys
                                         numerous missions and field activities located in Southeastern and Eastern Europe, the
                                         Caucasus, and Central Asia. The website of the OSCE is: <www.osce.org>.

                                                 ABOUT THE COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE

                                              The Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, also known as the Helsinki
                                         Commission, is an independent U.S. Government commission created in 1976 to monitor
                                         and encourage compliance by the participating States with their OSCE commitments,
                                         with a particular emphasis on human rights.
                                              The Commission consists of nine members from the United States Senate, nine mem-
                                         bers from the House of Representatives, and one member each from the Departments of
                                         State, Defense and Commerce. The positions of Chair and Co-Chair rotate between the
                                         Senate and House every two years, when a new Congress convenes. A professional staff
                                         assists the Commissioners in their work.
                                              In fulfilling its mandate, the Commission gathers and disseminates relevant informa-
                                         tion to the U.S. Congress and the public by convening hearings, issuing reports that
                                         reflect the views of Members of the Commission and/or its staff, and providing details
                                         about the activities of the Helsinki process and developments in OSCE participating
                                         States.
                                              The Commission also contributes to the formulation and execution of U.S. policy
                                         regarding the OSCE, including through Member and staff participation on U.S. Delega-
                                         tions to OSCE meetings. Members of the Commission have regular contact with
                                         parliamentarians, government officials, representatives of non-governmental organiza-
                                         tions, and private individuals from participating States. The website of the Commission
                                         is: <www.csce.gov>.

                                                                                                                 [III]
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00003   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                                                               Russia’s Infrastructure Terrorists

                                                                                                         DECEMBER 8, 2022




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page

                                                                                                              WITNESSES


                                         Oleksandra Azarkhina, The Honorable Deputy Minister of Infrastructure of Ukraine ...........                                                               2

                                                                                                           PARTICIPANTS


                                         Bakhti Nishanov, Senior Policy Advisor, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Eu-
                                           rope ...............................................................................................................................................     1




                                                                                                                       [IV]
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                         (4)




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000    PO 00000    Frm 00004     Fmt 3193     Sfmt 3193   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX     KEMA
                                                                              Russia’s Infrastructure Terrorist



                                                                                                   December 8, 2022



                                                               Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
                                                                                                    Washington, DC


                                              The Briefing Was Held From 3:33 p.m. To 4:22 p.m. via videoconference, Bakhti
                                         Nishanov, Senior Policy Advisor, Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, pre-
                                         siding.
                                              Committee Staff Present: Bakhti Nishanov, Senior Policy Advisor, Commission on
                                         Security and Cooperation in Europe.


                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Bakhti Nishanov.
                                         I am a senior policy advisor at the Helsinki Commission, and today I welcome you to our
                                         briefing on ‘‘Russia’s Infrastructure Terrorists.’’
                                               Now, before we talk about it, let me address the elephant in the room because we
                                         have got some questions: Why do we call this terrorism? Why is this something that needs
                                         to be addressed as such?
                                               Because according to international humanitarian law, attacks on infrastructure are
                                         sometimes permissible. But in the case of Russia’s attack on Ukraine—the context of the
                                         attacks, and the context of this war matters tremendously—Russia has been—has started
                                         this war 288 days ago now. It has been bombing, killing, kidnapping, and committing
                                         other atrocities against Ukrainians. What was supposed to be a 3-day blitzkrieg really
                                         turned in what Putin himself yesterday said was a long-term engagement for Russia.
                                               Ukraine has been able to stand this long thanks to the heroic efforts of all Ukrain-
                                         ians unified and determined as never before. Global solidarity and assistance has helped,
                                         but Ukrainians are the ones who are shouldering the burden of fighting and dying in
                                         defense of their sovereignty, but also freedom of every single person in this world.
                                               In the face of this resistance and pushback, the murderous regime in Moscow has
                                         adopted a new strategy of bombing Ukraine critical civilian infrastructure. Russia has
                                         been mercilessly and methodically targeting Ukraine’s critical infrastructure and other
                                         civilian objects plunging millions of Ukrainians into darkness and cold.
                                               Schools, hospitals, maternity wards, and kindergartens have not been able to func-
                                         tion. The direct strikes killed thousands. The secretary of State talked about it today, put
                                         out a statement, and he said thousands have died.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     (1)




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00005   Fmt 3194    Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                               While there are no reliable numbers on the number of civilian deaths that may have
                                         attributed to this infrastructure terrorism, it is clear Russia’s targeting infrastructure to
                                         maximize pain to civilians and damage their property. Russia’s goal is to demoralize and
                                         terrorize Ukrainians for political goals, and that is very much a definition of terrorism.
                                               Ukrainians have responded to this with heroic efforts, but Russia’s attacks continue,
                                         and the Ukrainian grid teeters on a brink of failure—I want to stress this—no civilian
                                         power has ever designed to withstand.
                                               So today we will have a conversation with the deputy minister of infrastructure of
                                         Ukraine, Hon. Oleksandra Azarkhina, to examine the extent of damage to critical infra-
                                         structure and the toll in human suffering, and importantly, what is it the United States
                                         can do to help Ukraine withstand this cruel winter.
                                               So welcome, Deputy Minister. Thank you so much for joining us today, and I have
                                         to say, we were a couple of minutes late because you just came back from your meeting
                                         with the secretary of energy. So maybe you could start there. Maybe you could talk a little
                                         bit about what is happening in Ukraine, and why is this such an important topic?
                                               Because this is a war, but these infrastructure attacks are clearly something that are
                                         hurting Ukrainians to an extent that we have not seen before. Can you talk about what
                                         is happening, and what we can do about it?
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: So first of all, thank you for having me. It is a very important oppor-
                                         tunity for all of us to be here, and really, we are very grateful to all American citizens,
                                         to the government, and to the Nation for supporting us.
                                               We understand that without your support we could not sustain, and actually, the
                                         losses would be enormous. But yes, we are resilient, and we keep fighting.
                                               Just to, you know, to picture what it is to live now in Ukraine—I have traveled a
                                         journey. When I come back to Kyiv, in the evening I would drive from my office to my
                                         parents’ house in Kyiv suburbs—literal warzone, just close to the Bucha—and the journey
                                         to my parents’ house, it is, practically speaking, a catalogue of Russian war crimes.
                                               To my left, I see an office building just recently destroyed by shell heads that were
                                         targeting the energy facility. Right to it, destroyed main office of Ukrainian national elec-
                                         tricity company. Then I am driving further, there is my favorite supermarket—13,000
                                         square meters—totally destroyed in March when they were still trying to capture Kyiv.
                                               Right after that, it is, you know, a garden shop. I love garden flowers, but now it
                                         is not flowers, but Russian tanks buried under the snow. I can not take a short route
                                         because the bridge is destroyed, so I am circling around, and I see more destruction—like
                                         a gas station, like storages.
                                               Happily, my parents’ house is fine. They bought it after they left Crimea because we
                                         are from Crimea, and after Russia occupied Crimea in 2014, we left the peninsula, and
                                         then left a second time in February.
                                               Happily, thanks to the Ukrainian Armed Forces our house is fine, and we can keep
                                         working and going there. But that is just one personal story. The overall estimations
                                         made by World Bank now with the damage of Russian aggression is nearly $100 billion.
                                               Since the first days of the full-scale invasion, Russia has systematically attacked
                                         civilian infrastructure. Since fall, in response to Ukrainian successes on the frontline, they
                                         chose a new target—Ukrainian energy infrastructure, and they say—even claiming pub-
                                         licly—that the goal is to make us negotiate.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     2




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00006   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                              First of all, we understand that they already achieved more than 50 percent of the
                                         energy infrastructure destroyed, and we understand that the goal they achieved it is dark-
                                         ness in our apartments. The worst may happen if in the cold days the heating systems
                                         will be stopped.
                                              I just would ask our viewers to think about, do you have opportunity to control the
                                         temperature in your apartment or house during the winter? The normal answer is, yes.
                                         Here we can see interesting examples when there are not only two nations are fighting,
                                         but two different approaches of fighting.
                                              Russia, thanks to the Soviet Union, are building a centralized system, where you can
                                         not choose the temperature in your apartment, and Russians they are still opening win-
                                         dows to make their apartment a bit cooler—not talking about the environmental, you
                                         know, effects of this. But frankly speaking, it is about subjectivity of the people and about
                                         the way how we can make inference, even in such simple things.
                                              So for sure at the moment we understand the worse things could happen if they con-
                                         tinue their attacks, we would not have enough air defense to protect our critical national
                                         infrastructure, and really our citizens start to freeze. For sure, the most vulnerable are
                                         elderly people because it is not so easy to heat your apartment when you can not properly
                                         do your job, and for sure that is the most critical question for us to make their life
                                         sustainable.
                                              The second threat is actually nuclear security. Because of the Russian attacks, we
                                         need to shut down our nuclear plants because they are targeting their infrastructure and
                                         energy objects which are providing the transportation.
                                              One nuclear plant is working. They need to give the electricity back to the network,
                                         and it need to work. But, well, it is never to go because the transformators are destroyed.
                                         The energy is still at the nuclear plant and at serious threat.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Right.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: My father was a firefighter in Chernobyl.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Oh wow.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: He knows a lot about it.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Right.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Even though it is like kitchen small talks—
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: About nuclear energy, and—
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Yes.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Yes. Yes.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Those threats. So Ukraine knows what is it, and we know that
                                         nuclear plants need to be well protected.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Yes.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: For sure the best protection for nuclear plants is Russian soldiers
                                         out of Ukrainian territory. But at the moment we understand their goal, and their goal
                                         is actually to make sure that the life of civilians is impossible.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Right.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Our resilience is impossible as well. Heating systems are one of the
                                         most crucial things, but the nuclear threat is, unfortunately, one of the most real and
                                         actually dangerous.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     3




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00007   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                               Probably we need to understand that Ukraine is resilient. Ukraine is very creative,
                                         and of course, we keep fighting for every substation, for every, you know, nuclear plant,
                                         hydro station. We understand that we will keep doing that, and especially with the sup-
                                         port of the partners.
                                               That is actually—I see the partner, and I see that we are going to win this fight as
                                         well, but as a really practical ask, it is a game of air defense.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Air defense.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: Because it is impossible to protect those facilities just with bare
                                         hands.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Yes.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: Some fighting jets would be nice as well. I would never imagine
                                         myself, you know, speaking about such things, but it seems that nothing else is working
                                         to protect our lives.
                                               We understand that now in the moment when, of course, Ukraine need the support,
                                         but the time have come and Ukraine will stand with you as well protecting Western skies
                                         as well. It is actually our joint task to leave no chance for the terrorists to win.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: I think in many ways Ukraine—you said Ukraine will stand with the
                                         United States and the West in defending freedom and defending—but I do think Ukrain-
                                         ians are already doing it.
                                               Again, what we are supporting—our support is material and financial. Your support
                                         is what truly matters. It is the lives of people. It is the lives of soldiers—Ukrainian sol-
                                         diers and regular people—and watching this horror is just—I cannot believe this is hap-
                                         pening in this century, and it is being done.
                                               But we are in awe of your resilience, and we are in awe of your ability to come
                                         together as one nation. You know Ukrainians; sometimes back and they squabble, this
                                         and that, did not agree on anything. But now it is one nation, and it is truly amazing
                                         to see that.
                                               Let me ask you this, so you have—the picture that you painted—it is cold, it is dark.
                                         It is not just, you know, apartments, but it is also hospitals.
                                               I mean I saw a photo today of a maternity ward, and there was a little baby in there.
                                         You know, they had, you know, bomb proofing and everything, but every second of this
                                         baby’s life depends on electricity, on water, on heat, and this is what Ukrainians are
                                         facing.
                                               You said that 50 percent of Ukrainians—of Ukraine’s grid is out of function right
                                         now, but we also see Ukrainians are coming together and fixing it. Can you tell me about
                                         the strategy? What happens? So Russians bomb something, and you immediately go and
                                         try to fix it?
                                               Because it is just incredible to see Ukrainians just do that. I mean, I do not even
                                         know how—where you find the strength. But can you tell me a little bit about strategy?
                                         Do Russians come back and bomb it again and again? Is that what is going on?
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: So basically, I am trying to avoid all sensitive issues, not to let addi-
                                         tional information to—
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Yes. Of course. Of course. Of course.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: But basically, first of all, yes, our air defense capabilities are better
                                         now because of the additional aid we recently received. The speed that some of aid came
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     4




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00008   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                         only after their new strikes—I mean, I wish we could have avoided those things because
                                         we all know the threats from the beginning.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Right.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: But still, we are very grateful. Really, we know the speed—we know
                                         the dedication of the people who are dealing with that, and we are very grateful. But that
                                         is where it starts, air defenses.
                                               The air defense capability we have now there on the ground—we will again, again
                                         talk about them—fighting jets, again, because they are in the sky, and that is actually
                                         about the protection of the civilians again. Because when you can destroy this rocket from
                                         the sky, it makes more chances that it is, you know, less casualties on the ground.
                                               The second thing we are doing, it is actually we are creatively looking for the protec-
                                         tions on the ground. I will not tell you details, but—
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: I understand. Yes, yes, I understand that, yes.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: You can believe in our creativity, in our best ways, and we are really
                                         looking for interesting options.
                                               It is important to understand that Russians know our energy system very well—
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Yes.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: —Because, yes, it was constructed together with them. They know
                                         there—you know, the narrow places. Frankly speaking, the thing which is shocking us a
                                         lot is that when this—it is not only military people sitting and, you know—and drafting
                                         those plans how to destroy first grid of the high voltage, second grid of the lower voltage.
                                         It is civilian engineers who are telling Russian army where to hit.
                                               That is actually another shocking thing in our understanding who we are fighting
                                         now. So yes, we are working in the crowd to protect it as much as possible, but also, it
                                         is important that now we are looking for the solutions how to make our system more
                                         decentralized and how quickly substitute our, like, transformators, actually.
                                               Allies are helping us. We have efforts from all over the world, and we understand
                                         that a system is coming. Our job, for example, of our ministry is to make sure that this
                                         new equipment that will be better protected.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Okay.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: So that is basic things that we are doing. Of course, you know, every
                                         time when someone is asking me, when do you think you will re-establish, you know, the
                                         grid? I think tell me when Russia will stop. Then I can plan. Without that there is some
                                         difficulties, but still that is the plan.
                                               Basically, it is also, you know—yes, I describe, you know, the cold, the darkness, but
                                         still, you know, we are all fighting for the normality’s. Now Kyiv, there are still lights
                                         on and restaurants are working, but the sound of generators—
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Oh, it is the generators, yes. Yes.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: So all over the country now we have generators—very environ-
                                         mentally unfriendly—but it is a working thing, and yes, we are doing that.
                                               Of course it is important to have those alternatives. Of course it is important to find,
                                         you know, alternative ways, for example, to connect to Starlink, et cetera. Outlook is actu-
                                         ally bad for the resilience in terms of our, you know, way to communicate plans, et cetera.
                                               But we are creative, and I think we managed to build a new model of the delega-
                                         tion—for example, of the government—like in a week, and we understand now where,
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     5




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00009   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                         what, who, you know, in our regions has generators and Starlink, you know, et cetera,
                                         so yes.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: That is amazing. I think, frankly, on the battlefield and off the battle-
                                         field, more importantly, Ukrainians creativity and sense of humor, to be perfectly honest,
                                         is something I think is—you know, you have—you possess that. I think that is your secret
                                         weapon; that is your secret superpower. I mean, not so secret anymore, but I think that
                                         is what truly makes Ukrainians stand out, also, in so many ways.
                                               I have a couple more questions, but I also wanted to invite our audience to ask any
                                         questions. To be able to do that, there is a—so I do apologize. I am going to be looking
                                         at a screen.
                                               There are three little dots to your right, far right corner. So you click on it, and there
                                         is a Q&A option. So you click on the Q&A, and you are going to be able to ask any ques-
                                         tion that you would like. But in the meantime—so please feel free to ask those questions,
                                         and I can see them.
                                               But in the meantime, let me ask you this question. Tell me about the role of Iran
                                         and their drones in this. Because it is—again, they deny it, obviously, but we know. We
                                         have seen them. You possess them. You have them, right, in your possession.
                                               So tell me about the role of Iran and what is that needs to happen to stop that, in
                                         your estimation?
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: The main important fact the world need to know that inside Iranian
                                         drones we found equipment made in Europe and U.S. Very good quality.
                                               All equipment—not even of the double use, but to civilian usage. So it is actually very
                                         hard now to track how Iran got this equipment, but I know the investigations are going
                                         on to cut those supplying chains.
                                               But what really frightened us, it is the quality of the product.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Interesting. Okay.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: Yes, so our air forces and our engineers they checked inside, and
                                         actually, the product is simple but a good quality. Actually, it frightening us a lot when
                                         we received the first messages that Iran could deliver also ballistic missiles to Russia.
                                         Because if the ballistic missiles from Iran will be the same quality as their kamikaze
                                         drones, it is really bad news not only for Ukraine, but for all of the world.
                                               We understand that now we are facing the fact that it is not only Ukraine has not
                                         enough air defense capabilities, but world as well.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Right.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: Yes, no one was expecting that such a war would even happen, but
                                         the fact is that we have now on the world map countries which develop very serious mili-
                                         tary capabilities, and we just can not rely on the international law anymore.
                                               Every time, you know, people ask me, what are we going to be with Russia when
                                         you defeat—
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Yes.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: —My answer is, let us figure out what are we going to be with other
                                         autocratic countries, with our other plutocrats, with other oligarchic countries. Because
                                         the worst—and just so you understand what we are fighting, it is not only two nations
                                         fighting. But, yes, they just want—you know, just they want to destroy our Nation as well;
                                         it is obvious.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     6




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00010   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                              But that is also part of different systems and the connection Russia has all over the
                                         world, as in the Western world. Those oligarch connections, those corruption connections—
                                         those are the worst. Because I understand that our fight against Russia, it is also a fight
                                         against global corruption.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: That is, I think—this is a spirit of—frankly, our thinking on many
                                         of this, and I think we—I think within this commission you will find a lot of people would
                                         agree with you fully, 100 percent.
                                              Let me ask you this question, I have been reading—as I was preparing for this, I
                                         read that there are some issues with spare parts to—for—to be able to restore. Can you
                                         talk a little bit about that, and whether, you know, there i s any supplies that you know
                                         of that some countries that could—again, you know, certain countries might not be com-
                                         fortable—again, I do not know why—with sending, say, military systems, right, equip-
                                         ment, but spare parts for civilian infrastructure nobody should have any problems with—
                                         one would think so.
                                              So can you talk a little bit about that, and who—what are you looking at? Who you
                                         are looking at? What countries can help? What exactly are we looking at?
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Priority No. 1 is the transformators sort of thing, which transform
                                         the different voltage to make it possible to use electricity generated. That is like—
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Is it specific to, like, former Soviet space, or is it more generic? Or
                                         how does it work?
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Frankly speaking, it is—most of the time it is more Soviet-type
                                         because it is very high voltage.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: I see. Okay.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: So 750-class voltage is the most rare—[OFF MIC]—which were
                                         destroyed in the first throw. Interesting fact that Ukraine was producing them as well.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Interesting. Uh-huh.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Yes. Russia targeted the plant as well, so they, you know—
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: See, that is the problem with them knowing everything about, you
                                         know—yes. Yes.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Yes. Yes, this—but, yes, we are looking for them.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Yes. Okay.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: So 750, 330, and 110. That is three classes of voltage transformators.
                                         We are looking everywhere.
                                              We have a very detailed list, which I do not know if we are—you know, like, I will
                                         need to find it here—about the spare parts, but we do have this list.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Yes, yes, of course. Yes. Okay.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: We share it with all partners. We are willing to share it through
                                         you because it is not secret information. For sure it is just, you know, the thing we are
                                         scouting out all over the world.
                                              We are grateful to—for the U.S. Because the job they are already doing, you know,
                                         looking all over the world for those things, it is very impressive. Of course our neighbors
                                         are frustrated as well, and they understand how our system is working. They do have
                                         some, you know, things in storages.
                                              Basically, important message: generators are important, but they are not the solution
                                         of the problem.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     7




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00011   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Right. They are just—yes.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: We are asking allies to focus on the, you know, core of the problem,
                                         and the core of the problem is really the air defense. Then, like, transformator; then we
                                         can go to the generators.
                                               But still, we are trying to think ahead. Still we are trying to make sure that, you
                                         know, we will be sustained even if such devastation will continue. But the pattern I see—
                                         even with, you know, picture as I describe as whole destruction on my way home—the
                                         pattern is on our side because we find a way how to repair fast.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Excellent.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: We have support of our allies to actually repair it better, and we
                                         understand that allies are—we hope will help us even better with air defense. Those three
                                         things, that is the key for success.
                                               Again, yes, we understand what we need to do and the next step to be less vulnerable
                                         in the future.
                                               Mr NISHANOV: Can I ask you this question? To the extent that you can share this
                                         information—because I understand some of this could be classified—but is there—have
                                         you noticed, is there any sort of reason, cadence—I understand there is no rational reason
                                         why Russia is doing—I mean, we all know that.
                                               But is there any specific triggers? Are there any specific triggers when Russia inten-
                                         sifies its attacks? Or is it just systematic constant cadence of these attacks on the grid
                                         to be—to just, you know, demoralize people?
                                               Or are certain—you know, when they do not too well, say, on the frontline, do they
                                         increase—intensify their attacks on the grid? I mean, is there anything to that extent that
                                         you can share?
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: For sure we see the pattern when they have no chances in the battle-
                                         field. I think when, you know, they hit civilians—that we have seen. It is true.
                                               But again, it is more of that. I mean, when they are saying publicly—Peskov said
                                         that we are doing that to make them negotiate. I mean, that is more clear. But the good
                                         thing that Russians they create propaganda about Ukraine and started to believe in it.
                                               In one of the myths which they created, that Ukrainians, as Russians, are totally
                                         interested only in gas prices, and you know, those energy issues. That is why they always
                                         investing in such riots or something to make look like Ukrainians will stand up against
                                         Zelensky because the lights are off.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Right. Right.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: So I am quite happy that they are wrong, but that is actually one
                                         of the myths which was—[INAUDIBLE]. But there is also another piece which I would like
                                         to underline—Europe.
                                               Now they are targeting not only us, but Europe as well because Ukraine was
                                         exporting electricity to Europe, and our part in this process was important because we
                                         were a player which could make influence to the prices in Europe electricity market. But
                                         now, of course we cannot. We can generate, but we cannot export it.
                                               That is why it is another attack on Europe as well, and we know Russia know how
                                         to use famines, starvation as a weapon, and now they are using energy crisis as a weapon.
                                         We are seeing the same pattern, and they are even publicly—they are underlining that,
                                         you know, they keep doing that to make us act differently, and—
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     8




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00012   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Frankly, that was one of the reasons why we absolutely believe that
                                         this is terrorism. I mean, they want to compel you—they want to compel civilians of
                                         Ukraine to do a certain political—take up a certain political position.
                                              That is what they do, and they are killing people to achieve that political objective.
                                         Therefore, this is—I mean, that is the definition of terrorism, so not going to apologize
                                         for that.
                                              But can I ask you something? This is December. This is, you know, sort of mid to
                                         early December. It is going to get worse. It is going to get colder. It is going to get worse.
                                              You know, whatever resources you may have, they are going to—again, to an extent
                                         that you can speak to. They are going to—you are probably going to start running out
                                         of those resources. What does this winter look like for Ukraine and Ukrainians?
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Let us see. I mean, so for sure let me picture the war situation. Fact
                                         No. 1, nuclear plant damaged because of the switch on/switch off, because of their attacks.
                                         That is catastrophic not only for Ukraine, but for the world.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Yes.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Second, apocalyptic picture if the heating systems will be damaged
                                         entering the frozen days—[INAUDIBLE]—can be inhabitant houses and lots of people dying.
                                         It may happen.
                                              I do hope that the climate change is working well and the winter would not be so
                                         bad for us, but it may happen because we still have cold winters. So those are the worst
                                         situations.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Right.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Of course from what I see now, we have some, you know, resources
                                         to sustain and keep our fight, but for sure itis difficult. My 5 years old son is in Kyiv.
                                         So again, he is at my parent’s house from time to time because they are warm in there.
                                              I mean, they just have very old-fashioned way to heat the house and generators to
                                         pick the water from underground. But you know, when we are in the city, we are more
                                         vulnerable, and again, when there are lights off, more or less fine. It is been romantic.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: [LAUGHS.] I appreciate your optimism, yes.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Especially—
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: The bright side.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: Yes. I mean, the food industry is not so bright about that because,
                                         again, you understand the place of Ukraine in world starvation prevention, and we all
                                         see how the blockage of seaports in Ukraine actually affected whole countries and espe-
                                         cially the most vulnerable countries.
                                              So the food production, Agri sector and industry in general is in way worse situation
                                         than the civilians themselves because of their electricity shortage. But when there is no
                                         water, even I start to panic.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Yes.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: I mean of course we are all in the office already, you know, look for
                                         the options for the Bio-Toilets, but you know, that is not what we would like to have in
                                         the 21st century, and especially, again, for the elderly and children.
                                              Every day when I manage to organize a normal day for my son with, you know,
                                         kindergarten and like even in a swimming pool— I am so proud of myself, that is like
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     9




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00013   Fmt 3194   Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                         another victory. But every time there are, you know, some obstacles—morning attacks,
                                         like, afternoon outages—you know, the present wave.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: No.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: But I think we are all growing up very fast, and sometimes it is not
                                         just about alternatives, but about the reason to do that, and the reason is we—more than
                                         ourselves. It is just really about the future.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: That is incredible. One of the more, sort of, ultimate solutions, obvi-
                                         ously, you said would be air defense.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: Yes.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Do you feel like you have—I mean, about the capacity, the capability
                                         has increased, but what are we talking about here? I mean, more is always better, but
                                         what are, the sort of, bare minimum that you think that the United States allies, who-
                                         ever, should be supplying to Ukraine to be able to—again, at least through this winter,
                                         right, because, you know, let us get to the other side, and we will just take it from there?
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: One of the things where we can receive fast result is around the
                                         possibility to bring to Ukraine the capabilities with now less vulnerable countries. So the
                                         production cycle for the modern air defense capabilities is very long, and we do not have
                                         such time.
                                               But we understand there are capacities in the countries which are not under attack.
                                         What we are asking for allies, it is really to bring the systems to Ukraine now. We will
                                         come back. We will repair. Just really help us at this moment because for sure when—
                                         you know, in the majority of countries now they are just, you know, with beauty.
                                         [LAUGHS.] For us, it is to save millions. Actually, it is just a very urgent thing. So basi-
                                         cally, yes. For numbers, we understand that it is rather—sorry—so for us not to go in
                                         for very detail in numbers, but it is 10 times at least more than we are receiving now,
                                         at least.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Okay, understood. Okay.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: So for what we have received now, it is not even enough to protect
                                         Kyiv properly. So it is just to understand. But again, we are in an interesting situation.
                                         Israel made possible the protection of the sky mostly because they are small. We are a
                                         huge country. It is impossible to cover all the country with, you know, air defense, even
                                         if we already—I mean, we would be just covered in air defense capabilities. But still, the
                                         numbers—the need and the supply is like that, really a lot to do. But again, what we
                                         found out, the world was not ready for such war.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Yes. Right. Yes.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: That is not only people of Ukraine. It is somethin—you know, I used
                                         to work in the Ministry of Natural Resources and Protection. I was dreaming about dif-
                                         ferent, you know, capabilities development in 21st century. But no. Now we need to study
                                         the missiles, you know, different ways how to track the drones, et cetera. That is one of
                                         the worst, you know, crimes Russia did. They turn us from the progress again to times
                                         when we are competing with weapons. Just, you know, relying on the human lives. That
                                         is one of the worst things they did.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: I think—I think that is a—I think that is a good way to—I mean,
                                         good way is probably—that is not right. But, you know, this is exactly—I think when you
                                         look at it, if we went back to—again, instead of progress—instead of working on new types
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     10




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00014   Fmt 3194    Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                         of energy, whatever, we have gone back to burning wood, and coal, and everything. This
                                         is—it is all on Russia, to be very clear. Yes.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: There is starvation in Somalia, and Yemen. I mean, why? I wish,
                                         you know, all the world would not, you know, invest now in new air defense capabilities,
                                         but go and have them. But where, you know—
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: But that is what is going to happen. I would like to, just once again,
                                         invite our audience. If you have any questions, feel free to. Again, there is a three-
                                         button—three dots. Click on it, a Q&A box pops up, and you will be able to ask any ques-
                                         tion. But let me—one thing that I wanted to—and this is something that our chief of staff,
                                         Kyle, actually shared with me. It is just—it is really, kind of like it is seared in my head.
                                               One of the Kremlin propaganda channels said: Well, you know, you cannot really talk
                                         about victory, you cannot be thinking about winning, when you have to go to the bath-
                                         room in a bucket, right? I mean, that you do not have proper running water and toilet.
                                         You know, that is what you use for your toilet, and it seems like this is their thinking.
                                         This is what Russians want, right? They want to break the Ukrainian spirit. But it is
                                         just not going to happen.
                                               Do you think—I mean, again, this is—it is hard to, you know, speak for these people
                                         and to understand their motivation. But do you think their—based on what you have
                                         seen—is their gameplan just to continue bombing, and just assume that Ukraine—I mean,
                                         do not they understand that Ukrainians are not going to give up? Is this their long-term
                                         plan, do you think, based on what you have seen?
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: Actually, it is really too hard to judge them. It is really—I can not
                                         understand how—I do not know what the person who is pushing the button or choosing
                                         the corridor for the Cheetah missile is thinking about. I mean, I really do not understand
                                         that. That is just incredible to accept this motivation. One of the worst pictures I saw
                                         recently in the media, it was the way they are using actually the prisoners in the battle-
                                         field. So from what we know from the partners investigation, there are at least 50,000
                                         prisoners who took to the battlefield. What kind of motivation might be if they just, you
                                         know, risking their lives. They’re acting like under some, I do not know, narcotics or
                                         something. I mean, it just really—that is the most difficult question for me.
                                               But from what I see, we just need to bring them to justice and somehow make—
                                         remove the whole system. Because from what we see, it is not only because of the current
                                         president of Russia. It had deeper roots in their crimes, such as Holodomor, such as
                                         Gulag, and everything. They never said properly sorry. They never really thought about
                                         the crimes they did, and the same culture pattern is still there.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Holodomor, the German parliament last week voted this. I mean, they
                                         said it was genocide. No question about that, that it was a deliberate genocide.
                                               We have a couple questions. What sort of Ukrainian infrastructure is needed to
                                         permit Russian transit to Europe? For example, is electricity needed? So for Russians to
                                         be able to sell, to continue selling more gas to Europe, do they—do they need certain
                                         Ukrainian infrastructure to be operational? That is the question. Then we have also—
                                         there were reports about Turkish mobile power stations. It is the giant ships. What is the
                                         status on those?
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: Well, the second, unfortunately, I need to check with my colleagues.
                                         I am not sure. But hopefully it will work out.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     11




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00015   Fmt 3194    Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                               Regarding the transit, basically they do not really need us in this format now. But
                                         from what I feel from their actions now, they are not, you know, doing things rationally.
                                         That is why even if it will be the question, they would not go against it. So I think that
                                         they are already not on a pragmatic thing.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: It is not even pragmatic, right? It is just—
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: Yes. Yes. But what they are doing actually—so they started to hit
                                         the constructionsites as well in Ukrainian territory.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Okay, interesting.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: Yes. That means a lot, because they—again, they are targeting whole
                                         cycle to make us disabled. For sure, there are a lot of risks. But again, we understand.
                                         I do think that everyone in Ukraine clearly understand that is because of their failure
                                         on the frontline.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Yes. Yes. Deputy minister, there is a broader question, and I think
                                         we do not have to just limit it to the infrastructure or energy grid. But so we are going
                                         to have—we just had elections. We are going to have a new Congress. What would you
                                         like to see in terms of United States support. I mean, you have already identified air
                                         defense, but anything else that we might not be—I will be honest, for example, we had
                                         a meeting yesterday where something that, I think, were a little bit, you know, unaware
                                         of, like medical needs. Needs for, you know, medical supplies, and that sort of stuff. Obvi-
                                         ously, you are an expert in your field. You could, you know, stick to that. But if you think
                                         that there are some other priorities that we need to be thinking about. So I think that
                                         is the question.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: So basically, first of all, just keep supporting us.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Keep supporting? Yes.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: I mean, U.S. is a champion for supporting Ukraine, both for the
                                         defense and direct micro-financial support that help us a lot to operate as a State. That
                                         is important from our point of view. You know, we all proved that we are 100 percent
                                         opposite to the failure State, as the Russians hope us to be. So just really keep focusing,
                                         keep supporting. We understand that U.S. did for us more than to other countries in these
                                         terms, and we really appreciate that.
                                               But what I really would like to raise, and that is something related not only to the
                                         State sector but also to the private sector, I want us to move from the donor-recipient
                                         relationship to more partner-to-partner relationship. Of course, we are still very
                                         dependent. Of course, we are in a position when we need help and we are grateful for
                                         help. But it is a good time to start by building cooperations, industrial cooperations, and
                                         to plan a future together. How can it work? We are very innovative now. We are resilient.
                                         But we do not have access to the finances and we do not have proper access to the tech-
                                         nologies.
                                               If we will start together with private business in U.S. to build those cooperation, that
                                         will give us much better results. For example, the grain initiative launched by the presi-
                                         dent, when Ukraine actually buys the grain from the farmers and send it to Africa. Some
                                         may think that it is—why they are sending our donation, and sending grain, to Africa?
                                         No, it is a clever way to support both our farmers and ag sector, and to support really
                                         those who are on the edge of starvation. So that is one of the examples.
                                               But we can move more. If our farmers would have better access to the credit money—
                                         of course, it is all close now. So if we would have opportunities to support them indirectly
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     12




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00016   Fmt 3194    Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                         with really innovative loans, insurances, again, technologies—share technologies with our
                                         farmers, they will show you, you know, miracles. That is the way I would like to see our
                                         cooperations.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: I love that, yes.
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: We understand that land lease in a format which was recently
                                         proved, that is not the last lease we saw in the Second World War. But the good idea
                                         is to start a cooperation not only on the level of donation. But we will never say no to
                                         the donations. [LAUGHTER.] But—
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: I am glad that you clarified that, yes. I love that idea. I think what
                                         I appreciate about it is just how forward-looking it is. I mean, this war is going to end.
                                         Ukraine’s going to be victorious. Ukraine is going to win. There is no question about it.
                                         It is what is it that comes next. I think—I love that you are thinking about it. I think
                                         what your pitch is, you know, start thinking about Ukraine as an investment destination.
                                         Start thinking about Ukraine as a place where—you know, where it clearly showed, dem-
                                         onstrated that it can innovate, that it can deliver, and it can be super creative, like no
                                         one else. I think this is a very important message.
                                              We have one more question. What is the best thing that Americans can do to help
                                         Ukrainians through this winter? Should they be writing their representatives in Congress,
                                         donating to relief organizations, preparing care packages, or something else? I think this
                                         is a really, you know, kind of very American question, in a way. Very sort of tangibly,
                                         what is it we can do? I mean, air defenses is important but, you know, in my little town
                                         in Virginia, you know, a local government is just gathering just warm clothes to send to
                                         Ukraine.
                                              The thing is, everybody’s donating. I mean, they have done it a couple times in the
                                         past for other kinds, but this is what is happening. So what—in terms of these smaller
                                         things, if you will, what is it that regular Americans can do? If you were speaking to all
                                         Americans, what would you say?
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: [LAUGHS.] So, frankly speaking, the question is the best answer here.
                                         Yes, keep supporting us publicly, please. Make influence on the Congress. Of course, a
                                         lot of talks were around what will change if the balance would not be, like, Democrats,
                                         Republicans. So for sure, to make sure that you up bring Ukraine, it is important. From
                                         what I feel here, the support is really from the bottom up. I feel it from a whole society,
                                         whole institutions. So it is totally, like, you can feel that. So I have no doubts that it will
                                         continue. But still, just to make us be consistent in our cooperation and support, that is
                                         the main thing.
                                              Regarding the different relief organizations, et cetera, a lot of very operational, very,
                                         you know, just, like, I can not say any of them, just not to make, you know, how to say,
                                         jealous to others.
                                              Mr. NISHANOV: Yes, there is—Okay, fair enough. [LAUGHS.]
                                              Mr. AZARKHINA: But, frankly speaking, all which are already working in Ukraine are
                                         worth your attention. I do love a project we have together with the Ministry of Digital
                                         Transformation called United 24. So it is actually a very good way to show how your dona-
                                         tions are becoming the part of something bigger. There are also the parts—you can choose
                                         how you are donating for the defense capabilities, or for the reconstruction, and every-
                                         thing. That is really good. But also, again, I repeat my, like, suggestion to start and think
                                         about partnership with the Ukrainians, and education as well.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     13




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00017   Fmt 3194    Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Education? Yes. Yes. I mean, excellent. I mean, speaking of grass-
                                         roots, I think this is one my absolutely favorite examples. I mean, I live out of Virginia.
                                         You know, everywhere there are Ukrainian flags. I mean, second only to U.S. flags every-
                                         where in my neighborhood. But I think one of my absolutely favorite was when it was
                                         a little bit warmer and I was walking down a street, I took my kids to their class. There
                                         was a lady sitting in a car, and she had a little tiny Ukrainian flag. I just automatically,
                                         without even thinking, I said, slava Ukraini. She automatically went, heroyam slava,
                                         right? Which is, like—with a very kind of American accent. But, you know, I was, like,
                                         oh my God, it is becoming a thing.
                                               It was—so I think you are right. Grassroots support, it is 100 percent there. I think
                                         we had a hearing yesterday. We had—it was—you know, our Commission is bipartisan.
                                         One thing that Congressman Wilson, who chaired over a portion of it, said: This is one
                                         thing where Republicans and Democrats agree. I mean, he said, you know, he has not
                                         seen anything on any other topic where you can see this bipartisanship and bipartisan
                                         support. Ukrainians in many ways have captured our imaginations and our hearts, and
                                         I think that support will continue. So you can definitely count on that.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: My message to the Republicans is, again, again, about industrial
                                         cooperation. I visited a lot of industries here during this visit. I was joking, like, you are
                                         our best advocates. [LAUGHS.] I mean, no joke, but I understand that there are places for
                                         more cooperation on the ground in that partnership.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: I appreciate that. It is not—I think what your message is, it is not
                                         just—we are not just recipients of donations. Or, you know, we are not out there just
                                         looking for handouts. But really, we want to work together. I think—I think in many ways
                                         that the spirit of the revolution of dignity, frankly, and I think it is what Ukrainians do.
                                         They show dignity, they show up, and this is—they do not want any handouts. They do
                                         not want any favors from anyone. They just want to be able to live their lives according
                                         to rules. That is what they want to do. I think in many ways what you are saying is 100
                                         percent true.
                                               I think we are almost at a 1-hour mark. I do not—I think we have answered all the
                                         questions. I just wanted to give you an opportunity to just again address the people who
                                         are watching it. Maybe you could—what is the message? You know, you are going to be
                                         heading back to Kyiv—
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: Yep, tomorrow.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Tomorrow. Okay. Okay. We will be thinking of you. We want to make
                                         sure that you are there, and we are obviously going to stay in touch. But as you are
                                         departing the United States, what is the one message—I mean, I think you said, you
                                         know, keep supporting us, which we will.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: I am a Star Wars fan.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Okay. Okay. I mean, you are a deputy minister for infrastructure, so
                                         I mean, that would not be—yes.
                                               Mr. AZARKHINA: [LAUGHS.] I mean, and as a Star Wars fan, it is really—it is obvious
                                         who is the empire here and who is the resistance. What I love about Hollywood is actually
                                         to putting very clearly where is the good and where is the evil. Russia somehow make
                                         our life easier with such atrocities, what they are doing in Ukraine, because it is, you
                                         know, absolutely evil here. Because before they were trying to play in this, you know,
                                         propaganda, false—like false truth things, et cetera. It was way more difficult to pursue
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     14




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00018   Fmt 3194    Sfmt 3194   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                         it, what they were doing—or the things they were doing. Now they start, of course, in
                                         2014.
                                               So the only thing I wish is everyone would listen to us, would keep thinking about
                                         the good, about the values, about the real reasons which make us humans and not ani-
                                         mals. So Slava Ukraini.
                                               Mr. NISHANOV: Heroyam slava. I think one important note on that is you are 100
                                         percent right. This is not Ukraine—and I think—I mean, I have said it before. Ukrainians
                                         are not doing it just for themselves. I mean, you are doing it for your country and for
                                         your people. For that little kid, you know, in a hospital that I saw today, just absolutely
                                         breaks your heart. But I think you are doing it for everyone else. You know, somebody
                                         at the hearing that we had yesterday said: You know, if Ukrainians do not stop this evil,
                                         it is going to come next to you, right? It is going to be—you know, NATO is right there.
                                               So, you know, Ukrainians are the ones who are stopping this. So on behalf of every-
                                         one who is reasonable, rational, kind, and not evil, thank you so much for everything that
                                         you do. TIME named President Zelensky, but importantly, spirit of Ukrainian people, as
                                         the person of the year. I think the spirit of Ukrainian people is truly the person of the
                                         year, and of this decade, maybe of this century. So on behalf of everyone else, thank you
                                         so much. Thank you for joining us and taking the time to join us today. I know we had
                                         a very busy schedule. So thank you so much. Really appreciate it. Thank you.
                                               Mr. AZARKIHINA: Thank you very much. Thank you.
                                               [Whereupon, at 4:22 p.m., the briefing ended.]


                                                                                                                     Æ
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                                                                                                                     15




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00019   Fmt 3194    Sfmt 6011   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
                                                        This is an official publication of the Commission on
                                                              Security and Cooperation in Europe.
                                                                                                            ★ ★ ★
                                                                      This publication is intended to document
                                                                      developments and trends in participating
                                                                       States of the Organization for Security
                                                                        and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
                                                                                                            ★ ★ ★
                                                      All Commission publications may be freely reproduced,
                                                      in any form, with appropriate credit. The Commission
                                                        encourages the widest possible dissemination of its
                                                                          publications.
                                                                                                            ★ ★ ★
                                                                        www.csce.gov                                    @HelsinkiComm
                                                          The Commission’s Web site provides access
                                                            to the latest press releases and reports,
                                                         as well as hearings and briefings. Using the
                                                    Commission’s electronic subscription service, readers are
                                                       able to receive press releases, articles, and other
                                                      materials by topic or countries of particular interest.
                                                                                          Please subscribe today.
CSCE18-11 with DISTILLER




                           VerDate Mar 15 2010   11:11 Jun 16, 2023   Jkt 000000   PO 00000   Frm 00020   Fmt 3190   Sfmt 3190   C:\SEALS\51-269.XXX   KEMA
